=== SCENE 1 ===
arming one in all the world.

They noticed for the first time how her green eyes danced, how deep
her dimples were when she laughed, how tiny her hands and feet and what
a small waist she had. Their clever remarks sent her into merry peals
of laughter and, inspired by the thought that she considered them a
remarkable pair, they fairly outdid themselves.

It was a memorable day in the life of the twins. Thereafter, when
they talked it over, they always wondered just why they had failed to
notice Scarlett's charms before. They never arrived at the correct
answer, which was that Scarlett on that day had decided to make them
notice. She was constitutionally unable to endure any man being in love
with any woman not herself, and the sight of India Wilkes and Stuart at
the speaking had been too much for her predatory nature. Not content
with Stuart alone, she had set her cap for Brent as well, and with a
thoroughness that overwhelmed the two of them.

Now they were both in love with her, and India Wilkes and Letty
Munroe, from Lovejoy, whom Brent had been half-heartedly courting, were
far in the back of their minds. Just what the loser would do, should
Scarlett accept either one of them, the twins did not ask. They would
cross that bridge when they came to it. For the present they were quite
satisfied to be in accord again about one girl, for they had no
jealousies between them. It was a situation which interested the
neighbors and annoyed their mother, who had no liking for Scarlett.

"It will serve you right if that sly piece does accept one of you,"
she said. "Or maybe she'll accept both of you, and then you'll have to
move to Utah, if the Mormons'll have you—which I doubt...All that
bothers me is that some one of these days you're both going to get
lickered up and jealous of each other about that two-faced, little,
green-eyed baggage, and you'll shoot each other. But that might not be
a bad idea either."

Since the day of the speaking, Stuart had been uncomfortable in
India's presence. Not that India ever reproached him or even indicated
by look or gesture that she was aware of his abruptly changed
allegiance. She was too much of a lady. But Stuart felt guilty and ill
at ease with her. He knew he had made India love him and he knew that
she still loved him and, deep in his heart, he had the feeling that he
had not played the gentleman. He still liked her tremendously and
respected her for her cool good breeding, her book learning and all the
sterling qualities she possessed. But, damn it, she was just so pallid
and uninteresting and always the same, beside Scarlett's bright and
changeable charm. You always knew where you stood with India and you
never had the slightest notion with Scarlett. That was enough to drive
a man to distraction, but it had its charm.

"Well, let's go over to Cade Calvert's and have supper. Scarlett
said Cathleen was home from Charleston. Maybe she'll have some news
about Fort Sumter that we haven't heard."

"Not Cathleen. I'll lay you two to one she didn't even know the fort
was out there in the harbor, much less that it was full of Yankees
until we shelled them out. All she'll know about is the balls she went
to and the beaux she collected."

"Well, it's fun to hear her gabble. And it'll be somewhere to hide
out till Ma has gone to bed."

"Well, hell! I like Cathleen and she is fun and I'd like to hear
about Caro Rhett and the rest of the Charleston folks; but I'm damned
if I can stand sitting through another meal with that Yankee stepmother
of hers."

"Don't be too hard on her, Stuart. She means well."

"I'm not being hard on her. I feel sorry for her, but I don't like
people I've got to feel sorry for. And she fusses around so much,
trying to do the right thing and make you feel at home, that she always
manages to say and do just exactly the wrong thing. She gives me the
fidgets! And she thinks Souther

=== SCENE 2 ===
lashless look of a rabbit, and India could be
described by no other word than plain.

India was nowhere to be seen, but Scarlett knew she probably was in
the kitchen giving final instructions to the servants. Poor India,
thought Scarlett, she's had so much trouble keeping house since her
mother died that she's never had the chance to catch any beau except
Stuart Tarleton, and it certainly wasn't my fault if he thought I was
prettier than she.

John Wilkes came down the steps to offer his arm to Scarlett. As she
descended from the carriage, she saw Suellen smirk and knew that she
must have picked out Frank Kennedy in the crowd.

If I couldn't catch a better beau than that old maid in britches!
she thought contemptuously, as she stepped to the ground and smiled her
thanks to John Wilkes.

Frank Kennedy was hurrying to the carriage to assist Suellen, and
Suellen was bridling in a way that made Scarlett want to slap her.
Frank Kennedy might own more land than anyone in the County and he
might have a very kind heart, but these things counted for nothing
against the fact that he was forty, slight and nervous and had a thin
ginger-colored beard and an old-maidish, fussy way about him. However,
remembering her plan, Scarlett smothered her contempt and cast such a
flashing smile of greeting at him that he stopped short, his arm
outheld to Suellen and goggled at Scarlett in pleased bewilderment.

Scarlett's eyes searched the crowd for Ashley, even while she made
pleasant small talk with John Wilkes, but he was not on the porch.
There were cries of greeting from a dozen voices and Stuart and Brent
Tarleton moved toward her. The Munroe girls rushed up to exclaim over
her dress, and she was speedily the center of a circle of voices that
rose higher and higher in efforts to be heard above the din. But where
was Ashley? And Melanie and Charles? She tried not to be obvious as she
looked about and peered down the hall into the laughing group
inside.

As she chattered and laughed and cast quick glances into the house
and the yard, her eyes fell on a stranger, standing alone in the hall,
staring at her in a cool impertinent way that brought her up sharply
with a mingled feeling of feminine pleasure that she had attracted a
man and an embarrassed sensation that her dress was too low in the
bosom. He looked quite old, at least thirty-five. He was a tall man and
powerfully built. Scarlett thought she had never seen a man with such
wide shoulders, so heavy with muscles, almost too heavy for gentility.
When her eye caught his, he smiled, showing animal-white teeth below a
close-clipped black mustache. He was dark of face, swarthy as a pirate,
and his eyes were as bold and black as any pirate's appraising a
galleon to be scuttled or a maiden to be ravished. There was a cool
recklessness in his face and a cynical humor in his mouth as he smiled
at her, and Scarlett caught her breath. She felt that she should be
insulted by such a look and was annoyed with herself because she did
not feel insulted. She did not know who he could be, but there was
undeniably a look of good blood in his dark face. It showed in the thin
hawk nose over the full red lips, the high forehead and the wide-set
eyes.

She dragged her eyes away from his without smiling back, and he
turned as someone called: "Rhett! Rhett Butler! Come here! I want you
to meet the most hardhearted girl in Georgia."

Rhett Butler? The name had a familiar sound, somehow connected with
something pleasantly scandalous, but her mind was on Ashley and she
dismissed the thought.

"I must run upstairs and smooth my hair," she told Stuart and Brent,
who were trying to get her cornered from the crowd. "You boys wait for
me and don't run off with any other girl or I'll be furious."

She could see that Stuart was going to be difficult to handle today
if she flirted with anyone else. He had been drinking and wore the
ar

=== SCENE 3 ===
d, turning, she saw
Charles Hamilton. He was a nice-looking boy with a riot of soft brown
curls on his white forehead and eyes as deep brown, as clean and as
gentle as a collie dog's. He was well turned out in mustard-colored
trousers and black coat and his pleated shirt was topped by the widest
and most fashionable of black cravats. A faint blush was creeping over
his face as she turned for he was timid with girls. Like most shy men
he greatly admired airy, vivacious, always-at-ease girls like Scarlett.
She had never given him more than perfunctory courtesy before, and so
the beaming smile of pleasure with which she greeted him and the two
hands outstretched to his almost took his breath away.

"Why Charles Hamilton, you handsome old thing, you! I'll bet you
came all the way down here from Atlanta just to break my poor
heart!"

Charles almost stuttered with excitement, holding her warm little
hands in his and looking into the dancing green eyes. This was the way
girls talked to other boys but never to him. He never knew why but
girls always treated him like a younger brother and were very kind, but
never bothered to tease him. He had always wanted girls to flirt and
frolic with him as they did with boys much less handsome and less
endowed with this world's goods than he. But on the few occasions when
this had happened he could never think of anything to say and he
suffered agonies of embarrassment at his dumbness. Then he lay awake at
night thinking of all the charming gallantries he might have employed;
but he rarely got a second chance, for the girls left him alone after a
trial or two.

Even with Honey, with whom he had an unspoken understanding of
marriage when he came into his property next fall, he was diffident and
silent. At times, he had an ungallant feeling that Honey's coquetries
and proprietary airs were no credit to him, for she was so boy-crazy he
imagined she would use them on any man who gave her the opportunity.
Charles was not excited over the prospect of marrying her, for she
stirred in him none of the emotions of wild romance that his beloved
books had assured him were proper for a lover. He had always yearned to
be loved by some beautiful, dashing creature full of fire and
mischief.

And here was Scarlett O'Hara teasing him about breaking her
heart!

He tried to think of something to say and couldn't, and silently he
blessed her because she kept up a steady chatter which relieved him of
any necessity for conversation. It was too good to be true.

"Now, you wait right here till I come back, for I want to eat
barbecue with you. And don't you go off philandering with those other
girls, because I'm mighty jealous," came the incredible words from red
lips with a dimple on each side; and briskly black lashes swept
demurely over green eyes.

"I won't," he finally managed to breathe, never dreaming that she
was thinking he looked like a calf waiting for the butcher.

Tapping him lightly on the arm with her folded fan, she turned to
start up the stairs and her eyes again fell on the man called Rhett
Butler who stood alone a few feet away from Charles. Evidently he had
overheard the whole conversation, for he grinned up at her as
maliciously as a tomcat, and again his eyes went over her, in a gaze
totally devoid of the deference she was accustomed to.

"God's nightgown!" said Scarlett to herself in indignation, using
Gerald's favorite oath. "He looks as if—as if he knew what I looked
like without my shimmy," and, tossing her head, she went up the
steps.

In the bedroom where the wraps were laid, she found Cathleen Calvert
preening before the mirror and biting her lips to make them look
redder. There were fresh roses in her sash that matched her cheeks, and
her cornflower-blue eyes were dancing with excitement.

"Cathleen," said Scarlett, trying to pull the corsage of her dress
higher, "who is that nasty man downstairs named Butler?"

"My dear, don't you know?" whispered Cathleen excitedly, a weather
eye on the next room where Dilcey and the Wilkes girls' mammy were
gossiping. "I can't imagine how Mr. Wilkes must feel having him here,
but he was visiting Mr. Kennedy in Jonesboro—something about buying
cotton—and, of course, Mr. Kennedy had to bring him along with him. He
couldn't just go off and leave him."

"What is the matter with him?"

"My dear, he isn't received!"

"Not really!"

"No."

Scarlett digested this in silence, for she had never before been
under the same roof with anyone who was not received. It was very
exciting.

"What did he do?"

"Oh, Scarlett, he has the most terrible reputation. His name is
Rhett Butler and he's from Charleston and his folks are some of the
nicest people there, but they won't even speak to him. Caro Rhett told
me about him last summer. He isn't any kin to her family, but she knows
all about him, everybody does. He was expelled from West Point.
Imagine! And for things too bad for Caro to know. And then there was
that business about the girl he didn't marry."

"Do tell me!"

"Darling, don't you know anything? Caro told me all about it last
summer and her mama would die if she thought Caro even knew about it.
Well, this Mr. Butler took a Charleston girl out buggy riding. I never
did know who she was, but I've got my suspicions. She couldn't have
been very nice or she wouldn't have gone out with him in the late
afternoon without a chaperon. And, my dear, they stayed out nearly all
night and walked home finally, saying the horse had run away and
smashed the buggy and they had gotten lost in the woods. And guess
what—"

"I can't guess. Tell me," said Scarlett enthusiastically, hoping for
the worst.

"He refused to marry her the next day!"

"Oh," said Scarlett, her hopes dashed.

"He said he hadn't—er—done anything to her and he didn't see why
he should marry her. And, of course, her brother called him out, and
Mr. Butler said he'd rather be shot than marry a stupid fool. And so
they fought a duel and Mr. Butler shot the girl's brother and he died,
and Mr. Butler had to leave Charleston and now nobody receives him,"
finished Cathleen triumphantly, and just in time, for Dilcey came back
into the room to oversee the toilet of her charge.

"Did she have a baby?" whispered Scarlett in Cathleen's ear.

Cathleen shook her head violently. "But she was ruined just the
same," she hissed back.

I wish I had gotten Ashley to compromise me, thought Scarlett
suddenly. He'd be too much of a gentleman not to marry me. But somehow,
unbidden, she had a feeling of respect for Rhett Butler for refusing to
marry a girl who was a fool.


Scarlett sat on a high rosewood ottoman, under the shade of a huge
oak in the rear of the house, her flounces and ruffles billowing about
her and two inches of green morocco slippers—all that a lady could
show and still remain a lady—peeping from beneath them. She had
scarcely touched plate in her hands and seven cavaliers about her. The
barbecue had reached its peak and the warm air was full of laughter and
talk, the click of silver on

=== SCENE 4 ===
glance she redoubled her gaiety with her cavaliers,
laughing, saying daring things, teasing, tossing her head at their
compliments until her earrings danced. She said "fiddle-dee-dee" many
times, declared that the truth wasn't in any of them, and vowed that
she'd never believe anything any man told her. But Ashley did not seem
to notice her at all. He only looked up at Melanie and talked on, and
Melanie looked down at him with an expression that radiated the fact
that she belonged to him.

So, Scarlett was miserable.

To the outward eye, never had a girl less cause to be miserable. She
was undoubtedly the belle of the barbecue, the center of attention. The
furore she was causing among the men, coupled with the heart burnings
of the other girls, would have pleased her enormously at any other
time.

Charles Hamilton, emboldened by her notice, was firmly planted on
her right, refusing to be dislodged by the combined efforts of the
Tarleton twins. He held her fan in one hand and his untouched plate of
barbecue in the other and stubbornly refused to meet the eyes of Honey,
who seemed on the verge of an outburst of tears. Cade lounged
gracefully on her left, plucking at her skirt to attract her attention
and staring up with smoldering eyes at Stuart. Already the air was
electric between him and the twins and rude words had passed. Frank
Kennedy fussed about like a hen with one chick, running back and forth
from the shade of the oak to the tables to fetch dainties to tempt
Scarlett, as if there were not a dozen servants there for that purpose.
As a result, Suellen's sullen resentment had passed beyond the point of
ladylike concealment and she glowered at Scarlett. Small Carreen could
have cried because, for all Scarlett's encouraging words that morning,
Brent had done no more than say "Hello, Sis" and jerk her hair ribbon
before turning his full attention to Scarlett. Usually he was so kind
and treated her with a careless deference that made her feel grown up,
and Carreen secretly dreamed of the day when she would put her hair up
and her skirts down and receive him as a real beau. And now it seemed
that Scarlett had him. The Munroe girls were concealing their chagrin
at the defection of the swarthy Fontaine boys, but they were annoyed at
the way Tony and Alex stood about the circle, jockeying for a position
near Scarlett should any of the others arise from their places.

They telegraphed their disapproval of Scarlett's conduct to Hetty
Tarleton by delicately raised eyebrows. "Fast" was the only word for
Scarlett. Simultaneously, the three young ladies raised lacy parasols,
said they had had quite enough to eat, thank you, and, laying light
fingers on the arms of the men nearest them, clamored sweetly to see
the rose garden, the spring and the summerhouse. This strategic retreat
in good order was not lost on a woman present or observed by a man.

Scarlett giggled as she saw three men dragged out of the line of her
charms to investigate landmarks familiar to the girls from childhood,
and cut her eye sharply to see if Ashley had taken note. But he was
playing with the ends of Melanie's sash and smiling up at her. Pain
twisted Scarlett's heart. She felt that she could claw Melanie's ivory
skin till the blood ran and take pleasure in doing it.

As her eyes wandered from Melanie, she caught the gaze of Rhett
Butler, who was not mixing with the crowd but standing apart talking to
John Wilkes. He had been watching her and when she looked at him he
laughed outright. Scarlett had an uneasy feeling that this man who was
not received was the only one present who knew what lay behind her wild
gaiety and that it was affording him sardonic amusement. She could have
clawed him with pleasure too.

"If I can just live through this barbecue till this afternoon," she
thought, "all the girls will go upstairs

=== SCENE 5 ===
disappeared in an intensity that Scarlett had never seen
before. "But, like Father, I hope the Yankees will let us go in peace
and that there will be no fighting—" He held up his hand with a smile,
as a babel of voices from the Fontaine and Tarleton boys began. "Yes,
yes, I know we've been insulted and lied to—but if we'd been in the
Yankees' shoes and they were trying to leave the Union, how would we
have acted? Pretty much the same. We wouldn't have liked it."

"There he goes again," thought Scarlett. "Always putting himself in
the other fellow's shoes." To her, there was never but one fair side to
an argument. Sometimes, there was no understanding Ashley.

"Let's don't be too hot headed and let's don't have any war. Most of
the misery of the world has been caused by wars. And when the wars were
over, no one ever knew what they were all about."

Scarlett sniffed. Lucky for Ashley that he had an unassailable
reputation for courage, or else there'd be trouble. As she thought
this, the clamor of dissenting voices rose up about Ashley, indignant,
fiery.

Under the arbor, the deaf old gentleman from Fayetteville punched
India.

"What's it all about? What are they saying?"

"War!" shouted India, cupping her hand to his ear. "They want to
fight the Yankees!"

"War, is it?" he cried, fumbling about him for his cane and heaving
himself out of his chair with more energy than he had shown in years.
"I'll tell 'um about war. I've been there." It was not often that Mr.
McRae had the opportunity to talk about war, the way his women folks
shushed him.

He stumped rapidly to the group, waving his cane and shouting and,
because he could not hear the voices about him, he soon had undisputed
possession of the field.

"You fire-eating young bucks, listen to me. You don't want to fight.
I fought and I know. Went out in the Seminole War and was a big enough
fool to go to the Mexican War, too. You all don't know what war is. You
think it's riding a pretty horse and having the girls throw flowers at
you and coming home a hero. Well, it ain't. No, sir! It's going hungry,
and getting the measles and pneumonia from sleeping in the wet. And if
it ain't measles and pneumonia, it's your bowels. Yes sir, what war
does to a man's bowels—dysentery and things like that—"

The ladies were pink with blushes. Mr. McRae was a reminder of a
cruder era, like Grandma Fontaine and her embarrassingly loud belches,
an era everyone would like to forget.

"Run get your grandpa," hissed one of the old gentleman's daughters
to a young girl standing near by. "I declare," she whispered to the
fluttering matrons about her, "he gets worse every day. Would you
believe it, this very morning he said to Mary—and she's only sixteen:
'Now, Missy...'" And the voice went off into a whisper as the
granddaughter slipped out to try to induce Mr. McRae to return to his
seat in the shade.

Of all the group that milled about under the trees, girls smiling
excitedly, men talking impassionedly, there was only one who seemed
calm. Scarlett's eyes turned to Rhett Butler, who leaned against a
tree, his hands shoved deep in his trouser pockets. He stood alone,
since Mr. Wilkes had left his side, and had uttered no word as the
conversation grew hotter. The red lips under the close-clipped black
mustache curled down and there was a glint of amused contempt in his
black eyes—contempt, as if he listened to the braggings of children. A
very disagreeable smile, Scarlett thought. He listened quietly until
Stuart Tarleton, his red hair tousled and his eyes gleaming, repeated:
"Why, we could lick them in a month! Gentlemen always fight better than
rabble. A month— why, one battle—"

"Gentlemen," said Rhett Butler, in a flat drawl that bespoke his
Charleston birth, not moving from his position against the tree or
taking his hands from his pockets, "may I say a word?"

There was contempt in his manner as in his eyes, contempt overlaid
with an air of courtesy that somehow burlesqued their own manners.

The group turned toward him and accorded him the politeness always
due an outsider.

"Has any one of you gentlemen ever thought that there's not a cannon
factory south of the Mason-Dixon Line? Or how few iron foundries there
are in the South? Or woolen mills or cotton factories or tanneries?
Have you thought that we would not have a single warship and that the
Yankee fleet could bottle up our harbors in a week, so that we could
not sell our cotton abroad? But—of course—you gentlemen have thought
of these things."

"Why, he means the boys are a passel of fools!" thought Scarlett
indignantly, the hot blood coming to her cheeks.

Evidently, she was not the only one to whom this idea occurred, for
several of the boys were beginning to stick out their chins. John
Wilkes casually but swiftly came back to his place beside the speaker,
as if to impress on all present that this man was his guest and that,
moreover, there were ladies present.

"The trouble with most of us Southerners," continued Rhett Butler,
"is that we either don't travel enough or we don't profit enough by our
travels. Now, of course, all you gentlemen are well traveled. But what
have you seen? Europe and New York and Philadelphia and, of course, the
ladies have been to Saratoga" (he bowed slightly to the group under the
arbor). "You've seen the hotels and the museums and the balls and the
gambling houses. And you've come home believing that there's no place
like the South. As for me, I was Charleston born, but I have spent the
last few years in the North." His white teeth showed in a grin, as
though he realized that everyone present knew just why he no longer
lived in Charleston, and cared not at all if they did know. "I have
seen many things that you all have not seen. The thousands of
immigrants who'd be glad to fight for the Yankees for food and a few
dollars, the factories, the foundries, the shipyards, the iron and coal
mines—all the things we haven't got. Why, all we have is cotton and
slaves and arrogance. They'd lick us in a month."

For a tense moment, there was silence. Rhett Butler removed a fine
linen handkerchief from his coat pocket and idly flicked dust from his
sleeve. Then an ominous murmuring arose in the crowd and from under the
arbor came a humming as unmistakable as that of a hive of newly
disturbed bees. Even while she felt the hot blood of wrath still in her
cheeks, something in Scarlett's practical mind prompted the thought
that what this man said was right, and it sounded like common sense.
Why, she'd never even seen a factory, or known anyone who had seen a
factory. But, even if it were true, he was no gentleman to make such a
statement—and at a party, too, where everyone was having a good
time.

Stuart Tarleton, brows lowering, came forward with Brent close at
his heels. Of course, the Tarleton twins had nice manners and they
wouldn't make a scene at a barbecue, even though tremendously provoked.
Just the same, all the ladies felt pleasantly excited, for it was so
seldom that they actually saw a scene or a quarrel. Usually they had to
hear of it third-hand.

"Sir," said Stuart heavily, "what do you mean?"

Rhett looked at him with polite but mocking eyes.

"I mean," he answered, "what Napoleon—perhaps you've heard of
him?—remarked once, 'God is on the side of the strongest battalion!'"
and, turning to John Wilkes, he said with courtesy that was unfeigned:
"You promised to show me your library, sir. Would it be too great a
favor to ask to see it now? I fear I must go back to Jonesboro early
this afternoon where a bit of business calls me."

He swung about, facing the crowd, clicked his heels togeth

=== SCENE 6 ===
like Melanie to her. Oh, far
better that she had followed Ellen and Mammy's precepts and never,
never revealed that she even liked him—better anything than to be
faced with this scorching shame!

She sprang to her feet, her hands clenched and he rose towering over
her, his face full of the mute misery of one forced to face realities
when realities are agonies.

"I shall hate you till I die, you cad—you lowdown—lowdown—" What
was the word she wanted? She could not think of any word bad
enough.

"Scarlett—please—"

He put out his hand toward her and, as he did, she slapped him
across the face with all the strength she had. The noise cracked like a
whip in the still room and suddenly her rage was gone, and there was
desolation in her heart.

The red mark of her hand showed plainly on his white tired face. He
said nothing but lifted her limp hand to his lips and kissed it. Then
he was gone before she could speak again, closing the door softly
behind him.

She sat down again very suddenly, the reaction from her rage making
her knees feel weak. He was gone and the memory of his stricken face
would haunt her till she died.

She heard the soft muffled sound of his footsteps dying away down
the long hall, and the complete enormity of her actions came over her.
She had lost him forever. Now he would hate her and every time he
looked at her he would remember how she threw herself at him when he
had given her no encouragement at all.

"I'm as bad as Honey Wilkes," she thought suddenly, and remembered
how everyone, and she more than anyone else, had laughed contemptuously
at Honey's forward conduct. She saw Honey's awkward wigglings and heard
her silly titters as she hung onto boys' arms, and the thought stung
her to new rage, rage at herself, at Ashley, at the world. Because she
hated herself, she hated them all with the fury of the thwarted and
humiliated love of sixteen. Only a little true tenderness had been
mixed into her love. Mostly it had been compounded out of vanity and
complacent confidence in her own charms. Now she had lost and, greater
than her sense of loss, was the fear that she had made a public
spectacle of herself. Had she been as obvious as Honey? Was everyone
laughing at her? She began to shake at the thought.

Her hand dropped to a little table beside her, fingering a tiny
china rose-bowl on which two china cherubs smirked. The room was so
still she almost screamed to break the silence. She must do something
or go mad. She picked up the bowl and hurled it viciously across the
room toward the fireplace. It barely cleared the tall back of the sofa
and splintered with a little crash against the marble mantelpiece.

"This," said a voice from the depths of the sofa, "is too much."

Nothing had ever startled or frightened her so much, and her mouth
went too dry for her to utter a sound. She caught hold of the back of
the chair, her knees going weak under her, as Rhett Butler rose from
the sofa where he had been lying and made her a bow of exaggerated
politeness.

"It is bad enough to have an afternoon nap disturbed by such a
passage as I've been forced to hear, but why should my life be
endangered?"

He was real. He wasn't a ghost. But, saints preserve us, he had
heard everything! She rallied her forces into a semblance of
dignity.

"Sir, you should have made known your presence."

"Indeed?" His white teeth gleamed and his bold dark eyes laughed at
her.

=== SCENE 7 ===
as quieter now and she tiptoed up the steps into the
silent hall. A heavy warm somnolence lay over the house, as if it slept
at ease like the girls, until night when it would burst into its full
beauty with music and candle flames. Carefully, she eased open the door
of the dressing room and slipped in. Her hand was behind her, still
holding the knob, when Honey Wilkes' voice, low pitched, almost in a
whisper, came to her through the crack of the opposite door leading
into the bedroom.

"I think Scarlett acted as fast as a girl could act today."

Scarlett felt her heart begin its mad racing again and she clutched
her hand against it unconsciously, as if she would squeeze it into
submission. "Eavesdroppers often hear highly instructive things," jibed
a memory. Should she slip out again? Or make herself known and
embarrass Honey as she deserved? But the next voice made her pause. A
team of mules could not have dragged her away when she heard Melanie's
voice.

"Oh, Honey, no! Don't be unkind. She's just high spirited and
vivacious. I thought her most charming."

"Oh," thought Scarlett, clawing her nails into her basque. "To have
that mealymouthed little mess take up for me!"

It was harder to bear than Honey's out-and-out cattiness. Scarlett
had never trusted any woman and had never credited any woman except her
mother with motives other than selfish ones. Melanie knew she had
Ashley securely, so she could well afford to show such a Christian
spirit. Scarlett felt it was just Melanie's way of parading her
conquest and getting credit for being sweet at the same time. Scarlett
had frequently used the same trick herself when discussing other girls
with men, and it had never failed to convince foolish males of her
sweetness and unselfishness.

"Well, Miss," said Honey tartly, her voice rising, "you must be
blind."

"Hush, Honey," hissed the voice of Sally Munroe. "They'll hear you
all over the house!"

Honey lowered her voice but went on.

"Well, you saw how she was carrying on with every man she could get
hold of—even Mr. Kennedy and he's her own sister's beau. I never saw
the like! And she certainly was going after Charles." Honey giggled
self-consciously. "And you know, Charles and I—"

"Are you really?" whispered voices excitedly.

"Well, don't tell anybody, girls—not yet!"

There were more gigglings and the bed springs creaked as someone
squeezed Honey. Melanie murmured something about how happy she was that
Honey would be her sister.

"Well, I won't be happy to have Scarlett for my sister, because
she's a fast piece if ever I saw one," came the aggrieved voice of
Hefty Tarleton. "But she's as good as engaged to Stuart. Brent says she
doesn't give a rap about him, but, of course, Brent's crazy about her,
too."

"If you should ask me," said Honey with mysterious importance,
"there's only one person she does give a rap about. And that's
Ashley!"

As the whisperings merged together violently, questioning,
interrupting, Scarlett felt herself go cold with fear and humiliation.
Honey was a fool, a silly, a simpleton about men, but she had a
feminine instinct about other women that Scarlett had underestimated.
The mortification and hurt pride that she had suffered in the library
with Ashley and with Rhett Butler were pin pricks to this. Men could be
trusted to keep their mouths shut, even men like Mr. Butler, but with
Honey Wilkes giving tongue like a hound in the field, the entire County
would know about it before six o'clock. And Gerald had said only last
night that he wouldn't be having the County laughing at his daughter.
And how they would all laugh now! Clammy perspiration, starting under
her armpits, began to creep down her ribs.

Melanie's voice, measured and peaceful, a little repr

=== SCENE 8 ===
no possible use for it as quietly and serenely as a
shopkeeper, and Scarlett patterned her conduct on Melly's.

There were crowds in front of every other counter but theirs, girls
chattering, men buying. The few who came to them talked about how they
went to the university with Ashley and what a fine soldier he was or
spoke in respectful tones of Charles and how great a loss to Atlanta
his death had been.

Then the music broke into the rollicking strains of "Johnny Booker,
he'p dis Nigger!" and Scarlett thought she would scream. She wanted to
dance. She wanted to dance. She looked across the floor and tapped her
foot to the music and her green eyes blazed so eagerly that they fairly
snapped. All the way across the floor, a man, newly come and standing
in the doorway, saw them, started in recognition and watched closely
the slanting eyes in the sulky, rebellious face. Then he grinned to
himself as he recognized the invitation that any male could read.

He was dressed in black broadcloth, a tall man, towering over the
officers who stood near him, bulky in the shoulders but tapering to a
small waist and absurdly small feet in varnished boots. His severe
black suit, with fine ruffled shirt and trousers smartly strapped
beneath high insteps, was oddly at variance with his physique and face,
for he was foppishly groomed, the clothes of a dandy on a body that was
powerful and latently dangerous in its lazy grace. His hair was jet
black, and his black mustache was small and closely clipped, almost
foreign looking compared with the dashing, swooping mustaches of the
cavalrymen near by. He looked, and was, a man of lusty and unashamed
appetites. He had an air of utter assurance, of displeasing insolence
about him, and there was a twinkle of malice in his bold eyes as he
stared at Scarlett, until finally, feeling his gaze, she looked toward
him.

Somewhere in her mind, the bell of recognition rang, but for the
moment she could not recall who he was. But he was the first man in
months who had displayed an interest in her, and she threw him a gay
smile. She made a little curtsy as he bowed, and then, as he
straightened and started toward her with a peculiarly lithe Indian-like
gait, her hand went to her mouth in horror, for she knew who he
was.

Thunderstruck, she stood as if paralyzed while he made his way
through the crowd. Then she turned blindly, bent on flight into the
refreshment rooms, but her skirt caught on a nail of the booth. She
jerked furiously at it, tearing it and, in an instant, he was beside
her.

"Permit me," he said bending over and disentangling the flounce. "I
hardly hoped that you would recall me, Miss O'Hara."

His voice was oddly pleasant to the ear, the well-modulated voice of
a gentleman, resonant and overlaid with the flat slow drawl of the
Charlestonian.

She looked up at him imploringly, her face crimson with the shame of
their last meeting, and met two of the blackest eyes she had ever seen,
dancing in merciless merriment. Of all the people in the world to turn
up here, this terrible person who had witnessed that scene with Ashley
which still gave her nightmares; this odious wretch who ruined girls
and was not received by nice people; this despicable man who had said,
and with good cause, that she was not a lady.

At the sound of his voice, Melanie turned and for the first time in
her life Scarlett thanked God for the existence of her sister-
in-law.

"Why—it's—it's Mr. Rhett Butler, isn't it?" said Melanie with a
little smile, putting out her hand. "I met you—"

"On the happy occasion of the announcement of your betrothal," he
finished, bending over her hand. "It is kind of you to recall me."

"And what are you doing so far from Charleston, Mr. Butler?"

"A boring matter of business, Mrs. Wilkes. I will be in and out of
your town from now on. I find I must not only bring in goods but see to
the disposal of them."

"Bring in—" began Melly, her brow wrinkling, a

=== SCENE 9 ===
worthy matrons
in the corner would talk about you, should you appear tonight in a red
dress and lead a reel. Personally, I think suttee much more merciful
than our charming Southern custom of burying widows alive!"

"How dare you say I'm buried alive!"

"How closely women crutch the very chains that bind them! You think
the Hindu custom barbarous—but would you have had the courage to
appear here tonight if the Confederacy hadn't needed you?"

Arguments of this character were always confusing to Scarlett. His
were doubly confusing because she had a vague idea there was truth in
them. But now was the time to squelch him.

"Of course, I wouldn't have come. It would have been—well,
disrespectful to—it would have seemed as if I hadn't lov—"

His eyes waited on her words, cynical amusement in them, and she
could not go on. He knew she hadn't loved Charlie and he wouldn't let
her pretend to the nice polite sentiments that she should express. What
a terrible, terrible thing it was to have to do with a man who wasn't a
gentleman. A gentleman always appeared to believe a lady even when he
knew she was lying. That was Southern chivalry. A gentleman always
obeyed the rules and said the correct things and made life easier for a
lady. But this man seemed not to care for rules and evidently enjoyed
talking of things no one ever talked about.

"I am waiting breathlessly."

"I think you are horrid," she said, helplessly, dropping her
eyes.

He leaned down across the counter until his mouth was near her ear
and hissed, in a very creditable imitation of the stage villains who
appeared infrequently at the Athenaeum Hall: "Fear not, fair lady! Your
guilty secret is safe with me!"

"Oh," she whispered, feverishly, "how can you say such things!"

"I only thought to ease your mind. What would you have me say? 'Be
mine, beautiful female, or I will reveal all?'"

She met his eyes unwillingly and saw they were as teasing as a small
boy's. Suddenly she laughed. It was such a silly situation, after all.
He laughed too, and so loudly that several of the chaperons in the
corner looked their way. Observing how good a time Charles Hamilton's
widow appeared to be having with a perfect stranger, they put their
heads together disapprovingly.


There was a roll of drums and many voices cried "Sh!" as Dr. Meade
mounted the platform and spread out his arms for quiet.

"We must all give grateful thanks to the charming ladies whose
indefatigable and patriotic efforts have made this bazaar not only a
pecuniary success," he began, "but have transformed this rough hall
into a bower of loveliness, a fit garden for the charming rosebuds I
see about me."

Everyone clapped approvingly.

"The ladies have given their best, not only of their time but of the
labor of their hands, and these beautiful objects in the booths are
doubly beautiful, made as they are by the fair hands of our charming
Southern women."

There were more shouts of approval, and Rhett Butler who had been
lounging negligently against the counter at Scarlett's side whispered:
"Pompous goat, isn't he?"

Startled, at first horrified, at this lese majesty toward Atlanta's
most beloved citizen, she stared reprovingly at him. But the doctor did
look like a goat with his gray chin whiskers wagging away at a great
rate, and with difficulty she stifled a giggle.

"But these things are not enough. The good ladies of the hospital
committee, whose cool hands have soothed many a suffering brow and
brought back from the jaws of death our brave men wounded in the
bravest of all Causes, know our needs. I will not enumerate them. We
must have more money to buy medical supplies from England, and we have
with us tonight the intrepid captain who has so successfully run the
blockade for a year and who will run it again to bring us the drugs we
need. Captain Rhett Butler!"

Though caught unawares, the blockader made a graceful bow—too
graceful, thought Scarlett, trying to analyze it. It was almost as if
he overdid his courtesy because his contempt for everybody present was
so great. There was a loud burst of applause as he bowed and a craning
of necks from the ladies in the corner. So that was who poor Charles
Hamilton's widow was carrying on with! And Charlie hardly dead a
year!

"We need more gold and I am asking you for it," the doctor
continued. "I am asking a sacrifice but a sacrifice so small compared
with the sacrifices our gallant men in gray are making that it will
seem laughably small. Ladies, I want your jewelry. _I_ want your
jewelry? No, the Confederacy wants your jewelry, the Confederacy calls
for it and I know no one will hold back. How fair a gem gleams on a
lovely wrist! How beautifully gold brooches glitter on the bosoms of
our patriotic women! But how much more beautiful is sacrifice than all
the gold and gems of the Ind. The gold will be melted and the stones
sold and the money used to buy drugs and other medical supplies.
Ladies, there will pass among you two of our gallant wounded, with
baskets and—" But the rest of his speech was lost in the storm and
tumult of clapping hands and cheering voices.

Scarlett's first thought was one of deep thankfulness that mourning
forbade her wearing her precious earbobs and the heavy gold chain that
had been Grandma Robillard's and the gold and black enameled bracelets
and the garnet brooch. She saw the little Zouave, a split-oak basket
over his unwounded arm, making the rounds of the crowd on her side of
the hall and saw women, old and young, laughing, eager, tugging at
bracelets, squealing in pretended pain as earrings came from pierced
flesh, helping each other undo stiff necklace clasps, unpinning
brooches from bosoms. There was a steady little clink-clink of metal on
metal and cries of "Wait—wait! I've got it unfastened now. There!"
Maybelle Merriwether was pulling off her lovely twin bracelets from
above and below her elbows. Fanny Elsing, crying "Mamma, may I?" was
tearing from her curls the seed-pearl ornament set in heavy gold which
had been in the family for generations. As each offering went into the
basket, there was applause and cheering.

The grinning little man was coming to their booth now, his basket
heavy on his arm, and as he passed Rhett Butler a handsome gold cigar
case was thrown carelessly into the basket. When he came to Scarlett
and rested his basket upon the counter, she shook her head throwing
wide her hands to show that she had nothing to give. It was
embarrassing to be the only person present who was giving nothing. And
then she saw the bright gleam of her wide gold wedding ring.

For a confused moment she tried to remember Charles' face—how he
had looked when he slipped it on her finger. But the memory was
blurred, blurred by the sudden feeling of irritation that memory of him
always brought to her. Charles—he was the reason why life was over for
her, why she was an old woman.

With a sudden wrench she seized the ring but it stuck. The Zouave
was moving toward Melanie.

"Wait!" cried Scarlett. "I have something for you!" The ring came
off and, as she started to throw it into the basket, heaped up with
chains, watches, rings, pins and bracelets, she caught Rhett Butler's
eye. His lips were twisted in a slight smile. Defiantly, she tossed the
ring onto the top of the pile.

"Oh, my darling!" whispered Molly, clutching her arm, her eyes
blazing with love and pride. "You brave, brave girl! Wait— please,
wait, Lieutenant Picard! I have something for you, too!"

She was tugging at her own wedding ring, the ring Scarlett knew had
never once left that finger since Ashley put it there. Scarlett knew,
as no one did, how much it meant to her. It came off with difficulty
and for a brief instant was clutched tightly in the small palm. Then it
was laid gently on the pile of jewelry. The two girls stood looking
after the Zouave who was moving toward the group of elderly ladies in
the corner, Scarlett defiant, Melanie with a look more pitiful than
tears. And neither expression was lost on the man who stood beside
them.

"If you hadn't been brave enough to do it, I would never have been
either," said Melly, putting her arm about Scarlett's waist and giving
her a gentle squeeze. For a moment Scarlett wanted to shake her off and
cry "Name of God!" at the top of her lungs, as Gerald did when he was
irritated, but she caught Rhett Butler's eye and managed a very sour
smile. It was annoying the way Melly always misconstrued her
motives—but perhaps that was far preferable to having her suspect the
truth.

"What a beautiful gesture," said Rhett Butler, softly. "It is such
sacrifices as yours that hearten our brave lads in gray."

Hot words bubbled to her lips and it was with difficulty that she
checked them. There was mockery in everything he said. She disliked him
heartily, lounging there against the booth. But there was something
stimulating about him, something warm and vital and electric. All that
was Irish in her rose to the challenge of his black eyes. She decided
she was going to take this man down a notch or two. His know

=== SCENE 10 ===
us to support her husband in an action of which she heartily
disapproved, was at a disadvantage. Mrs. Elsing, Mrs. Merriwether and
Mrs. Whiting were red with indignation. But suddenly the Home Guard
gave a cheer and it was taken up by the other uniformed guests. The
young girls clapped their hands and jumped excitedly.

"Don't you think it's—it's just—just a little like a slave
auction?" whispered Melanie, staring uncertainly at the embattled
doctor who heretofore had been perfect in her eyes.

Scarlett said nothing but her eyes glittered and her heart
contracted with a little pain. If only she were not a widow. If only
she were Scarlett O'Hara again, out there on the floor in an
apple-green dress with dark-green velvet ribbons dangling from her
bosom and tuberoses in her black hair—she'd lead that reel. Yes,
indeed! There'd be a dozen men battling for her and paying over money
to the doctor. Oh, to have to sit here, a wallflower against her will
and see Fanny or Maybelle lead the first reel as the belle of
Atlanta!

Above the tumult sounded the voice of the little Zouave, his Creole
accent very obvious: "Eef I may—twenty dollars for Mees Maybelle
Merriwether."

Maybelle collapsed with blushes against Fanny's shoulder and the two
girls hid their faces in each other's necks and giggled, as other
voices began calling other names, other amounts of money. Dr. Meade had
begun to smile again, ignoring completely the indignant whispers that
came from the Ladies' Hospital Committee in the corner.

At first, Mrs. Merriwether had stated flatly and loudly that her
Maybelle would never take part in such a proceeding; but as Maybelle's
name was called most often and the amount went up to seventy-five
dollars, her protests began to dwindle. Scarlett leaned her elbows on
the counter and almost glared at the excited laughing crowd surging
about the platform, their hands full of Confederate paper money.

Now, they would all dance—except her and the old ladies. Now
everyone would have a good time, except her. She saw Rhett Butler
standing just below the doctor and, before she could change the
expression of her face, he saw her and one corner of his mouth went
down and one eyebrow went up. She jerked her chin up and turned away
from him and suddenly she heard her own name called— called in an
unmistakable Charleston voice that rang out above the hubbub of other
names.

"Mrs. Charles Hamilton—one hundred and fifty dollars—in gold."

A sudden hush fell on the crowd both at the mention of the sum and
at the name. Scarlett was so startled she could not even move. She
remained sitting with her chin in her hands, her eyes wide with
astonishment. Everybody turned to look at her. She saw the doctor lean
down from the platform and whisper something to Rhett Butler. Probably
telling him she was in mourning and it was impossible for her to appear
on the floor. She saw Rhett's shoulders shrug lazily.

"Another one of our belles, perhaps?" questioned the doctor.

"No," said Rhett clearly, his eyes sweeping the crowd carelessly.
"Mrs. Hamilton."

"I tell you it is impossible," said the doctor testily. "Mrs.
Hamilton will not—"

Scarlett heard a voice which, at first, she did not recognize as her
own.

"Yes, I will!"

She leaped to her feet, her heart hammering so wildly she feared she
could not stand, hammering with the thrill of being the center of
attention again, of being the most highly desired girl present and oh,
best of all, at the prospect of dancing again.

"Oh, I don't care! I don't care what they say!" she whispered, as a
sweet madness swept over her. She tossed her head and sped out of the
booth, tapping her heels like castanets, snapping open her black silk
fan to its widest.

For a fleeting instant she saw Melanie's incredulous face, the look
on the chaperons' faces, the petulant girls, the enthusiastic approval
of the soldiers.

Then she was on the floor and Rhett Butler was advancing toward her
through the aisle of the crowd, that nasty mocking smile on his face.
But she didn't care—didn't care if he were Abe Lincoln himself! She
was going to dance again. She was going to lead the reel. She swept him
a low curtsy and a dazzling smile and he bowed, one hand on his frilled
bosom. Levi, horrified, was quick to cover the situation and bawled:
"Choose yo' padners fo' de Ferginny reel!"

And the orchestra crashed into that best of all reel tunes,
"Dixie.

=== SCENE 11 ===
?"

"No, it is one of my most priceless memories—a delicately nurtured
Southern belle with her Irish up— You are very Irish, you know."

"Oh, dear, there's the end of the music and there's Aunt Pittypat
coming out of the back room. I know Mrs. Merriwether must have told
her. Oh, for goodness' sakes, let's walk over and look out the window.
I don't want her to catch me now. Her eyes are as big as saucers."

CHAPTER X

Over the waffles next morning, Pittypat was lachrymose, Melanie was
silent and Scarlett defiant.

"I don't care if they do talk. I'll bet I made more money for the
hospital than any girl there—more than all the messy old stuff we
sold, too."

"Oh, dear, what does the money matter?" wailed Pittypat, wringing
her hands. "I just couldn't believe my eyes, and poor Charlie hardly
dead a year...And that awful Captain Butler, making you so
conspicuous, and he's a terrible, terrible person, Scarlett. Mrs.
Whiting's cousin, Mrs. Coleman, whose husband came from Charleston,
told me about him. He's the black sheep of a lovely family—oh, how
could any of the Butlers ever turn out anything like him? He isn't
received in Charleston and he has the fastest reputation and there was
something about a girl—something so bad Mrs. Coleman didn't even know
what it was—"

"Oh, I can't believe he's that bad," said Melly gently. "He seemed a
perfect gentleman and when you think how brave he's been, running the
blockade—"

"He isn't brave," said Scarlett perversely, pouring half a pitcher
of syrup over her waffles. "He just does it for money. He told me so.
He doesn't care anything about the Confederacy and he says we're going
to get licked. But he dances divinely."

Her audience was speechless with horror.

"I'm tired of sitting at home and I'm not going to do it any longer.
If they all talked about me about last night, then my reputation is
already gone and it won't matter what else they say."

It did not occur to her that the idea was Rhett Butler's. It came so
patly and fitted so well with what she was thinking.

"Oh! What will your mother say when she hears? What will she think
of me?"

A cold qualm of guilt assailed Scarlett at the thought of Ellen's
consternation, should she ever learn of her daughter's scandalous
conduct. But she took heart at the thought of the twenty-five miles
between Atlanta and Tara. Miss Pitty certainly wouldn't tell Ellen. It
would put her in such a bad light as a chaperon. And if Pitty didn't
tat

=== SCENE 12 ===
harlie were only alive— You must never, never speak to that man
again, Scarlett."

Melanie had been sitting quietly, her hands in her lap, her waffles
cooling on her plate. She arose and, coming behind Scarlett, put her
arms about her neck.

"Darling," she said, "don't you get upset. I understand and it was a
brave thing you did last night and it's going to help the hospital a
lot. And if anybody dares say one little word about you, I'll tend to
them...Aunt Pitty, don't cry. It has been hard on Scarlett, not
going anywhere. She's just a baby." Her fingers played in Scarlett's
black hair. "And maybe we'd all be better off if we went out
occasionally to parties. Maybe we've been very selfish, staying here
with our grief. War times aren't like other times. When I think of all
the soldiers in town who are far from home and haven't any friends to
call on at night—and the ones in the hospital who are well enough to
be out of bed and not well enough to go back in the army— Why, we have
been selfish. We ought to have three convalescents in our house this
minute, like everybody else, and some of the soldiers out to dinner
every Sunday. There, Scarlett, don't you fret. People won't talk when
they understand. We know you loved Charlie."

Scarlett was far from fretting and Melanie's soft hands in her hair
were irritating. She wanted to jerk her head away and say "Oh,
fiddle-dee-dee!" for the warming memory was still on her of how the
Home Guard and the militia and the soldiers from the hospital had
fought for her dances last night. Of all the people in the world, she
didn't want Melly for a defender. She could defend herself, thank you,
and if the old cats wanted to squall— well, she could get along
without the old cats. There were too many nice officers in the world
for her to bother about what old women said.

Pittypat was dabbing at her eyes under Melanie's soothing words when
Prissy entered with a bulky letter.

"Fer you. Miss Melly. A lil nigger boy brung it."

"For me?" said Melly, wondering, as she ripped open the
envelope.

Scarlett was making headway with her waffles and so noticed nothing
until she heard a burst of tears from Melly and, looking up, saw Aunt
Pittypat's hand go to her heart.

"Ashley's dead!" screamed Pittypat, throwing her head back and
letting her arms go limp.

"Oh, my God!" cried Scarlett, her blood turning to ice water.

"No! No!" cried Melanie. "Quick! Her smelling salts, Scarlett!
There, there, honey, do you feel better? Breathe deep. No, it's not
Ashley. I'm so sorry I scared you. I was crying because I'm so happy,"
and suddenly she opened her clenched palm and pressed some object that
was in it to her lips. "I'm so happy," and burst into tears again.

Scarlett caught a fleeting glimpse and saw that it was a broad gold
ring.

"Read it," said Melly, pointing to the letter on the floor. "Oh, how
sweet, how kind, he is!"

Scarlett, bewildered, picked up the single sheet and saw written in
a black, bold hand: "The Confederacy may need the lifeblood of its men
but not yet does it demand the heart's blood of its women. Accept, dear
Madam, this token of my reverence for your courage and do not think
that your sacrifice has been in vain, for this ring has been redeemed
at ten times its value. Captain Rhett Butler."

Melanie slipped the ring on her finger and looked at it
lovingly.

"I told you he was a gentleman, didn't I?" she said turning to
Pittypat, her smile bright through the teardrops on her face. "No one
but a gentleman of refinement and thoughtfulness would ever have
thought how it broke my heart to— I'll send my gold chain instead.
Aunt Pittypat, you must write him a note and invite him to Sunday
dinner so I can thank him."

In the excitement, neither of the others seemed to have t

=== SCENE 13 ===
bulk of a buggy stop in front of the house and
indistinct figures alight. Someone was with him. Two figures paused at
the gate and she heard the click of the latch and Gerald's voice came
plain,

"Now I'll be giving you the 'Lament for Robert Emmet.' 'Tis a song
you should be knowing, me lad. I'll teach it to you."

"I'd like to learn it," replied his companion, a hint of buried
laughter in his flat drawling voice. "But not now, Mr. O'Hara."

"Oh, my God, it's that hateful Butler man!" thought Scarlett, at
first annoyed. Then she took heart. At least they hadn't shot each
other. And they must be on amicable terms to be coming home together at
this hour and in this condition.

"Sing it I will and listen you will or I'll be shooting you for the
Orangeman you are."

"Not Orangeman—Charlestonian."

"'Tis no better. 'Tis worse. I have two sister-in-laws in Charleston
and I know."

"Is he going to tell the whole neighborhood?" thought Scarlett
panic-stricken, reaching for her wrapper. But what could she do? She
couldn't go downstairs at this hour of the night and drag her father in
from the street.

With no further warning, Gerald, who was hanging on the gate, threw
back his head and began the "Lament," in a roaring bass. Scarlett
rested her elbows on the window sill and listened, grinning
unwillingly. It would be a beautiful song, if only her father could
carry a tune. It was one of her favorite songs and, for a moment, she
followed the fine melancholy of those verses beginning:

"She is far from the land where her young hero sleeps And lovers are
round her sighing."

The song went on and she heard stirrings in Pittypat's and Melly's
rooms. Poor things, they'd certainly be upset. They were not used to
full-blooded males like Gerald. When the song had finished, two forms
merged into one, came up the walk and mounted the steps. A discreet
knock sounded at the door.

"I suppose I must go down," thought Scarlett. "After all he's my
father and poor Pitty would die before she'd go." Besides, she didn't
want the servants to see Gerald in his present condition. And if Peter
tried to put him to bed, he might get unruly. Pork was the only one who
knew how to handle him.

She pinned the wrapper close about her throat, lit her bedside
candle and hurried down the dark stairs into the front hall. Setting
the candle on the stand, she unlocked the door and in the wavering
light she saw Rhett Butler, not a ruffle disarranged, supporting her
small, thickset father. The "Lament" had evidently been Gerald's swan
song for he was frankly hanging onto his companion's arm. His hat was
gone, his crisp long hair was tumbled in a white mane, his cravat was
under one ear, and there were liquor stains down his shirt bosom.

"Your father, I believe?" said Captain Butler, his eyes amused in
his swarthy face. He took in her dishabille in one glance that seemed
to penetrate through her wrapper.

"Bring him in," she said shortly, embarrassed at her attire,
infuriated at Gerald for putting her in a position where this man could
laugh at her.

Rhett propelled Gerald forward. "Shall I help you take him upstairs?
You cannot manage him. He's quite heavy."

Her mouth fell open with horror at the audacity of his proposal.
Just imagine what Pittypat and Melly cowering in their beds would
think, should Captain Butler come upstairs!

"Mother of God, no! In here, in the parlor on that settee."

"The suttee, did you say?"

"I'll thank you to keep a civil tongue in your head. Here. Now lay
him down."

"Shall I take off his boots?"

"No. He's sle

=== SCENE 14 ===
olding up my head in this town," she began. "You've
disgraced us all."

"Hold your tongue, Puss. Can you not see me head is bursting?"

"Coming home drunk with a man like Captain Butler, and singing at
the top of your lungs for everyone to hear and losing all that
money."

"The man is too clever with cards to be a gentleman. He—"

"What will Mother say when she hears?"

He looked up in sudden anguished apprehension. "You wouldn't be
telling your mother a word and upsetting her, now would you?"

Scarlett said nothing but pursed her lips.

"Think now how 'twould hurt her and her so gentle."

"And to think, Pa, that you said only last night I had disgraced the
family! Me, with my poor little dance to make money for the soldiers.
Oh, I could cry."

"Well, don't," pleaded Gerald. "'Twould be more than me poor head
could stand and sure 'tis bursting now."

"And you said that I—"

"Now Puss, now Puss, don't you be hurt at what your poor old father
said and him not meaning a thing and not understanding a thing! Sure,
you're a fine well-meaning girl, I'm sure."

"And wanting to take me home in disgrace."

"Ah, darling, I wouldn't be doing that. 'Twas to tease you. You
won't be mentioning the money to your mother and her in a flutter about
expenses already?"

"No," said Scarlett frankly, "I won't, if you'll let me stay here
and if you'll tell Mother that 'twas nothing but a lot of gossip from
old cats."

Gerald looked mournfully at his daughter.

"'Tis blackmail, no less."

"And last night was a scandal, no less."

"Well," he began wheedlingly, "we'll be forgetting all that. And do
you think a fine pretty lady like Miss Pittypat would be having any
brandy in the house? The hair of the dog—"

Scarlett turned and tiptoed through the silent hall into the dining
room to get the brandy bottle that she and Melly privately called the
"swoon bottle" because Pittypat always took a sip from it when her
fluttering heart made her faint—or seem to faint. Triumph was written
on her face and no trace of shame for her unfilial treatment of Gerald.
Now Ellen would be soothed with lies if any other busybody wrote her.
Now she could stay in Atlanta. Now she could do almost as she pleased,
Pittypat being the weak vessel that she was. She unlocked the cellaret
and stood for a moment with the bottle and glass pressed to her
bosom.

She saw a long vista of picnics by the bubbling waters of Peachtree
Creek and barbecues at Stone Mountain, receptions and balls, afternoon
danceables, buggy rides and Sunday-night buffet suppers. She would be
there, right in the heart of things, right in the center of a crowd of
men. And men fell in love so easily, after you did little things for
them at the hospital. She wouldn't mind the hospital so much now. Men
were so easily stirred when they had been ill. They fell into a clever
girl's hand just like the ripe peaches at Tara when the trees were
gently shaken.

She went back toward her father with the reviving liquor, thanking
Heaven that the famous O'Hara head had not been able to survive last
night's bout and wondering suddenly if Rhett Butler had had anything to
do with that.

CHAPTER XI

On an afternoon of the following week, Scarlett came home from the
hospital weary and indignant. She was tired from standing on her feet
all morning and irritable because Mrs. Merriwether had scolded her
sharply for sitting on a soldier's bed while she dressed his wounded
arm. Aunt Pitty and Melanie, bonneted in their best, were on the porch
with Wade and Prissy, ready for their weekly round of calls. Scarlett
asked to be excused from a

=== SCENE 15 ===
on her cheek in a gentle
caress.

Ellen was thin and preoccupied now and on her feet from morning
until long after the plantation was asleep. The demands of the
Confederate commissary were growing heavier by the month, and hers was
the task of making Tara produce. Even Gerald was busy, for the first
time in many years, for he could get no overseer to take Jonas
Wilkerson's place and he was riding his own acres. With Ellen too busy
for more than a goodnight kiss and Gerald in the fields all day,
Scarlett found Tara boring. Even her sisters were taken up with their
own concerns. Suellen had now come to an "understanding" with Frank
Kennedy and sang "When This Cruel War Is Over" with an arch meaning
Scarlett found well-nigh unendurable, and Carreen was too wrapped up in
dreams of Brent Tarleton to be interesting company.

Though Scarlett always went home to Tara with a happy heart, she was
never sorry when the inevitable letters came from Pitty and Melanie,
begging her to return. Ellen always sighed at these times, saddened by
the thought of her oldest daughter and her only grandchild leaving
her.

"But I mustn't be selfish and keep you here when you are needed to
nurse in Atlanta," she said. "Only—only, my darling, it seems that I
never get the time to talk to you and to feel that you are my own
little girl again before you are gone from me."

"I'm always your little girl," Scarlett would say and bury her head
upon Ellen's breast, her guilt rising up to accuse her. She did not
tell her mother that it was the dancing and the beaux which drew her
back to Atlanta and not the service of the Confederacy. There were many
things she kept from her mother these days. But, most of all, she kept
secret the fact that Rhett Butler called frequently at Aunt Pittypat's
house.


During the months that followed the bazaar, Rhett called whenever he
was in town, taking Scarlett riding in his carriage, escorting her to
danceables and bazaars and waiting outside the hospital to drive her
home. She lost her fear of his betraying her secret, but there always
lurked in the back of her mind the disquieting memory that he had seen
her at her worst and knew the truth about Ashley. It was this knowledge
that checked her tongue when he annoyed her. And he annoyed her
frequently.

He was in his mid-thirties, older than any bea

=== SCENE 16 ===
she had never bothered to control her temper except in Ellen's
presence. Now it was painful to have to choke back words for fear of
his amused grin. If only he would ever lose his temper too, then she
would not feel at such a disadvantage.

After tilts with him from which she seldom emerged the victor she
vowed he was impossible, ill-bred and no gentleman and she would have
nothing more to do with him. But sooner or later, he returned to
Atlanta, called, presumably on Aunt Pitty, and presented Scarlett, with
overdone gallantry, a box of bonbons he had brought her from Nassau. Or
preempted a seat by her at a musicale or claimed her at a dance, and
she was usually so amused by his bland impudence that she laughed and
overlooked his past misdeeds until the next occurred.

For all his exasperating qualities, she grew to look forward to his
calls. There was something exciting about him that she could not
analyze, something different from any man she had ever known. There was
something breathtaking in the grace of his big body which made his very
entrance into a room like an abrupt physical impact, something in the
impertinence and bland mockery of his dark eyes that challenged her
spirit to subdue him.

"It's almost like I was in love with him!" she thought, bewildered.
"But I'm not and I just can't understand it."

But the exciting feeling persisted. When he came to call, his
complete masculinity made Aunt Pitty's well-bred and ladylike house
seem small, pale and a trifle fusty. Scarlett was not the only member
of the household who reacted strangely and unwillingly to his presence,
for he kept Aunt Pitty in a flutter and a ferment.

While Pitty knew Ellen would disapprove of his calls on her
daughter, and knew also that the edict of Charleston banning him from
polite society was not one to be lightly disregarded, she could no more
resist his elaborate compliments and hand kissing than a fly can resist
a honey pot. Moreover, he usually brought her some little gift from
Nassau which he assured her he had purchased especially for her and
blockaded in at risk of his life— papers of pins and needles, buttons,
spools of silk thread and hairpins. It was almost impossible to obtain
these small luxuries now—ladies were wearing hand-whittled wooden
hairpins and covering acorns with cloth for buttons—and Pitty lacked
the moral stamina to refuse them. Besides, she had a childish love of
surprise packages and could not resist opening his gifts. And, having
once opened them, she did not feel that she could refuse them. Then,
having accepted his gifts, she could not summon courage enough to tell
him his reputation made it improper for him to call on three lone women
who had no male protector. Aunt Pitty always felt that she needed a
male protector when Rhett Butler was in the house.

"I don't know what it is about him," she would sigh helplessly.
"But—well, I think he'd be a nice, attractive man if I could just feel
that—well, that deep down in his heart he respected women."

Since the return of her wedding ring, Melanie had felt that Rhett
was a gentleman of rare refinement and delicacy and she was shocked at
this remark. He was unfailingly courteous to her, but she was a little
timid with him, largely because she was shy with any man she had not
known from childhood. Secretly she was very sorry for him, a feeling
which would have amused him had he been aware of it. She was certain
that some romantic sorrow had blighted his life and made him hard and
bitter, and she felt that what he needed was the love of a good woman.
In all her sheltered life she had never seen evil and could scarcely
credit its existence, and when gossip whispered things about Rhett and
the girl in Charleston she was shocked and unbelieving. And, instead of
turning her against him, it only made her more timidly gracious toward
him because of her indignation at what she fancied was a gross
injustice done him.

Scarlett silently agreed with Aunt Pitty. She, too, felt that he had
no respect for any woman, unless perhaps for Melanie. She still felt
unclothed every time his eyes ran up and down her figure. It was not
that he ever said anything. Then she could have scorched him with hot
words. It was the bold way his eyes looked out of his swarthy face with
a displeasing air of insolence, as if all women were his property to be
enjoyed in his own good time. Only with Melanie was this look absent.
There was never that cool look of appraisal, never mockery in his eyes,
when he looked at Melanie; and there was an especial note in his voice
when he spoke to her, courteous, respectful, anxious to be of
service.

"I don't see why you're so much nicer to her than to me," said
Scarlett petulantly, one afternoon when Melanie and Pitty had retired
to take their naps and she was alone with him.

For an hour she had watched Rhett hold the yarn Melanie was winding
for knitting, had noted the blank inscrutable expression when Melanie
talked at length and with pride of Ashley and his promotion. Scarlett
knew Rhett had no exalted opinion of Ashley and cared nothing at all
about the fact that he had been made a major. Yet he made polite
replies and murmured the correct things about Ashley's gallantry.

And if I so much as mention Ashley's name, she had thought
irritably, he cocks his eyebrow up and smiles that nasty, knowing
smile!

"I'm much prettier than she is," she continued, "and I don't see why
you're nicer to her."

"Dare I hope that you are jealous?"

"Oh, don't presume!"

"Another hope crushed. If I am 'nicer' to Mrs. Wilkes, it is because
she deserves it. She is one of the very few kind, sincere and unselfish
persons I have ever known. But perhaps you have failed to note these
qualities. And moreover, for all her youth, she is one of the few great
ladies I have ever been privileged to know."

"Do you mean to say you don't think I'm a great lady, too?"

"I think we agreed on the occasion of our first meeting that you
were no lady at all."

"Oh, if you are going to be hateful and rude enough to bring that up
again! How can you hold that bit of childish temper against me? That
was so long ago and I've grown up since then and I'd forget all about
it if you weren't always harping and hinting about it."

"I don't think it was childish temper and I don't believe you've
changed. You are just as capable now as then of throwing vases if you
don't get your own way. But you usually get your way now. And so
there's no necessity for broken bric-a-brac."

"Oh, you are—I wish I was a man! I'd call you out and—"

"And get killed for your pains. I can drill a dime at fifty yards.
Better stick to your own weapons—dimples, vases and the like."

"You are just a rascal."

"Do you expect me to fly into a rage at that? I am sorry to
disappoint you. You can't make me mad by calling me names that are
true. Certainly I'm a rascal, and why not? It's a free country and a
man may be a rascal if he chooses. It's only hypocrites like you, my
dear lady, just as black at heart but trying to hide it, who become
enraged when called by their right names."

She was helpless before his calm smile and his drawling remarks, for
she had never before met anyone who was so completely impregnable. Her
weapons of scorn, coldness and abuse blunted in her hands, for nothing
she could say would shame him. It had been her experience that the liar
was the hottest to defend his veracity, the coward his courage, the
ill-bred his gentlemanliness, and the cad his honor. But not Rhett. He
admitted everything and laughed and dared her to say more.

He came and went during these months, arriving unheralded and
leaving without saying good-by. Scarlett never discovered just what
business brought him to Atlanta, for few other blockaders found it
necessary to come so far away from the coast. They landed their cargoes
at Wilmington or Charleston, where they were met by swarms of merchants
and speculators from all over the South who assembled to buy blockaded
goods at auction.

=== SCENE 17 ===
l, professional
gambling were included in his career, as Atlanta heard it.

There was hardly a family in Georgia who could not own to their
sorrow at least one male member or relative who gambled, losing money,
houses, land and slaves. But that was different. A man could gamble
himself to poverty and still be a gentleman, but a professional gambler
could never be anything but an outcast.

Had it not been for the upset conditions due to the war and his own
services to the Confederate government, Rhett Butler would never have
been received in Atlanta. But now, even the most strait laced felt that
patriotism called upon them to be more broad minded. The more
sentimental were inclined to view that the black sheep of the Butler
family had repented of his evil ways and was making an attempt to atone
for his sins. So the ladies felt in duty bound to stretch a point,
especially in the case of so intrepid a blockader. Everyone knew now
that the fate of the Confederacy rested as much upon the skill of the
blockade boats in eluding the Yankee fleet as it did upon the soldiers
at the front.

Rumor had it that Captain Butler was one of the best pilots in the
South and that he was reckless and utterly without nerves. Reared in
Charleston, he knew every inlet, creek, shoal and rock of the Carolina
coast near that port, and he was equally at home in the waters around
Wilmington. He had never lost a boat or even been forced to dump a
cargo. At the onset of the war, he had emerged from obscurity with
enough money to buy a small swift boat and now, when blockaded goods
realized two thousand per cent on each cargo, he owned four boats. He
had good pilots and paid them well, and they slid out of Charleston and
Wilmington on dark nights, bearing cotton for Nassau, England and
Canada. The cotton mills of England were standing idle and the workers
were starving, and any blockader who could outwit the Yankee fleet
could command his own price in Liverpool. Rhett's boats were singularly
lucky both in taking out cotton for the Confederacy and bringing in the
war materials for which the South was desperate. Yes, the ladies felt
they could forgive and forget a great many things for such a brave
man.

He was a dashing figure and one that people turned to look at. He
spent money freely, rode a wild black stallion, and wore clothes which
were always the height of style and tailoring. The latter in itself was
enough to attract attention to him, for the uniforms of the soldiers
were dingy and worn now and the civilians, even when turned out in
their best, showed skillful patching and darning. Scarlett thought she
had never seen such elegant pants as he wore, fawn colored, shepherd's
plaid, and checked. As for his waistcoats, they were indescribably
handsome, especially the white watered-silk one with tiny pink rosebuds
embroidered on it. And he wore these garments with a still more elegant
air as though unaware of their glory.

There were few ladies who could resist his charms when he chose to
exert them, and finally even Mrs. Merriwether unbent and invited him to
Sunday dinner.

Maybelle Merriwether was to marry her little Zouave when he got his
next furlough, and she cried every time she thought of it, for she had
set her heart on marrying in a white satin dress and there was no white
satin in the Confederacy. Nor could she borrow a dress, for the satin
wedding dresses of years past had all gone into the making of battle
flags. Useless for the patriotic Mrs. Merriwether to upbraid her
daughter and point out that homespun was the proper bridal attire for a
Confederate bride. Maybelle wanted satin. She was willing, even proud
to go without hairpins and buttons and nice shoes and candy and tea for
the sake of the Cause, but she wanted a satin wedding dress.

Rhett, hearing of this from Melanie, brought in from England yards
and yards of gleaming white satin and a lace veil and presented them to
her as a wedding gift. He did it in such a way that it was unthinkable
to even mention paying him for them, and Maybelle was so delighted she
almost kissed him. Mrs. Merriwether knew that so expensive a gift—and
a gift of clothing at that—was highly improper, but she could think of
no way of refusing when Rhett told her in the most florid language that
nothing was too good to deck the bride of one of our brave heroes. So
Mrs. Merriwether invited him to dinner, feeling that this concession
more than paid for the gift.

He not only brought Maybelle the satin but he was able to give
excellent hints on the making of the wedding dress. Hoops in Paris were
wider this season and skirts were shorter. They were no longer ruffled
but were gathered up in scalloped festoons, showing braided petticoats
beneath. He said, too, that he had seen no pantalets on the streets, so
he imagined they were "out." Afterwards, Mrs. Merriwether told Mrs.
Elsing she feared that if she had given him any encouragement at all,
he would have told her exactly what kind of drawers were being worn by
Parisiennes.

Had he been less obviously masculine, his ability to recall details
of dresses, bonnets and coiffures would have been put down as the
rankest effeminacy. The ladies always felt a little odd when they
besieged him with questions about styles, but they did it nevertheless.
They were as isolated from the world of fashion as shipwrecked
mariners, for few books of fashion came through the blockade. For all
they knew the ladies of France might be shaving their heads and wearing
coonskin caps, so Rhett's memory for furbelows was an excellent
substitute for Godey's Lady's Book. He could and did notice details so
dear to feminine hearts, and after each trip abroad he could be found
in the center of a group of ladies, telling that bonnets were smaller
this year and perched higher, covering most of the top of the head,
that plumes and not flowers were being used to trim them, that the
Empress of France had abandoned the chignon for evening wear and had
her hair piled almost on the top of her

=== SCENE 18 ===
had never been a cowardly Confederate
soldier and they found this statement peculiarly irritating. He always
referred to the soldiers as "our brave boys" and "our heroes in gray"
and did it in such a way as to convey the utmost in insult. When daring
young ladies, hoping for a flirtation, thanked him for being one of the
heroes who fought for them, he bowed and declared that such was not the
case, for he would do the same thing for Yankee women if the same
amount of money were involved.

Since Scarlett's first meeting with him in Atlanta on the night of
the bazaar, he had talked with her in this manner, but now there was a
thinly veiled note of mockery in his conversations with everyone. When
praised for his services to the Confederacy, he unfailingly replied
that blockading was a business with him. If he could make as much money
out of government contracts, he would say, picking out with his eyes
those who had government contracts, then he would certainly abandon the
hazards of blockading and take to selling shoddy cloth, sanded sugar,
spoiled flour and rotten leather to the Confederacy.

Most of his remarks were unanswerable, which made them all the
worse. There had already been minor scandals about those holding
government contracts. Letters from men at the front complained
constantly of shoes that wore out in a week, gunpowder that would not
ignite, harness that snapped at any strain, meat that was rotten and
flour that was full of weevils. Atlanta people tried to think that the
men who sold such stuff to the government must be contract holders from
Alabama or Virginia or Tennessee, and not Georgians. For did not the
Georgia contract holders include men from the very best families? Were
they not the first to contribute to the hospital funds and to the aid
of soldiers' orphans? Were they not the first to cheer at "Dixie" and
the most rampant seekers, in oratory at least, for Yankee blood? The
full tide of fury against those profiteering on government contracts
had not yet risen, and Rhett's words were taken merely as evidence of
his own bad breeding.

He not only affronted the town with insinuations of venality on the
part of men in high places and slurs on the courage of the men in the
field, but he took pleasure in tricking the dignified citizenry into
embarrassing situations. He could no more resist pricking the conceits,
the hypocrisies and the flamboyant patriotism of those about him than a
small boy can resist putting a pin into a balloon. He neatly deflated
the pompous and exposed the ignorant and the bigoted, and he did it in
such subtle ways, drawing his victims out by his seemingly courteous
interest, that they never were quite certain what had happened until
they stood exposed as windy, high flown and slightly ridiculous.

During the months when the town accepted him, Scarlett had been
under no illusions about him. She knew that his elaborate gallantries
and his florid speeches were all done with his tongue in his cheek. She
knew that he was acting the part of the dashing and patriotic blockade
runner simply because it amused him. Sometimes he seemed to her like
the County boys with whom she had grown up, the wild Tarleton twins
with their obsession for practical jokes; the devil-inspired Fontaines,
teasing, mischievous; the Calverts who would sit up all night planning
hoaxes. But there was a difference, for beneath Rhett's seeming
lightness there was something malicious, almost sinister in its suave
brutality.

Though she was thoroughly aware of his insincerity, she much
preferred him in the role of the romantic blockader. For one thing, it
made her own situation in associating with him so much easier than it
had been at first. So, she was intensely annoyed when he dropped his
masquerade and set out apparently upon a deliberate campaign to
alienate Atlanta's good will. It annoyed her because it seemed foolish
and also because some of the harsh criticism directed at him fell on
her.

It was at Mrs. Elsing's silver musicale for the benefit of the
convalescents that Rhett signed his final warrant of ostracism. That
afternoon the Elsing home was crowded with soldiers on leave and men
from the hospitals, members of the Home Guard and the militia unit, and
matrons, widows and young girls. Every chair in the house was occupied,
and even the long winding stair was packed with guests. The large
cut-glass bowl held at the door by the Elsings' butler had been emptied
twice of its burden of silver coins. That in itself was enough to make
the affair a success, for now a dollar in silver was worth sixty
dollars in Confederate paper money.

Every girl with any pretense to accomplishments had sung or played
the piano, and the tableaux vivants had been greeted with flattering
applause. Scarlett was much pleased with herself, for not only had she
and Melanie rendered a touching duet, "When the Dew Is on the Blossom,"
followed as an encore by the more sprightly "Oh, Lawd, Ladies, Don't
Mind Stephen!" but she had also been chosen to represent the Spirit of
the Confederacy in the last tableau.

She had looked most fetching, wearing a modestly draped Greek robe
of white cheesecloth girdled with red and blue and holding the Stars
and Bars in one hand, while with the other she stretched out to the
kneeling Captain Carey Ashburn, of Alabama, the gold-hilted saber which
had belonged to Charles and his father.

When her tableau was over, she could not help seeking Rhett's eyes
to see if he had appreciated the pretty picture she made. With a
feeling of exasperation she saw that he was in an argument and probably
had not even noticed her. Scarlett could see by the faces of the group
surrounding him that they were infuriated by what he was saying.

She made her way toward them and, in one of those odd silences which
sometimes fall on a gathering, she heard Willie Guinan, of the militia
outfit, say plainly: "Do I understand, sir, that you mean the Cause for
which our heroes have died is not sacred?"

"If you were run over by a railroad train your death wouldn't
sanctify the railroad company, would it?" asked Rhett and his voice
sounded as if he were humbly seeking information.

"Sir," said Willie, his voice shaking, "if we were not under this
roof—"

"I tremble to think what would happen," said Rhett. "For, of course,
your bravery is too well known."

Willie went scarlet and all conversation ceased. Everyone was
embarrassed. Willie was strong and healthy and of military age and yet
he wasn't at the front. Of course, he was the only boy his mother had
and, after all, somebody had to be in the militia to protect the state.
But there were a few irreverent snickers from convalescent officers
when Rhett spoke of bravery.

"Oh, why doesn't he keep his mouth shut!" thought Scarlett
indignantly. "He's simply spoiling the whole party!"

Dr. Meade's brows were thunderous.

"Nothing may be sacred to you, young man," he said, in the voice he
always used when making speeches. "But there are many things sacred to
the patriotic men and ladies of the South. And the freedom of our land
from the usurper is one and States' Rights is another and—"

Rhett looked lazy and his voice had a silky, almost bored, note.

"All wars are sacred," he said. "To those who have to fight them. If
the people who started wars didn't make them sacred, who would be
foolish enough to fight? But, no matter what rallying cries the orators
give to the idiots who fight, no matter what noble purposes they assign
to wars, there is never but one reason for a war. And that is money.
All wars are in reality money squabbles. But so few people ever realize
it. Their ears are too full of bugles and drums and the fine words from
stay-at-home orators. Sometimes the rallying cry is 'Save the Tomb of
Christ from the Heathen!' Sometimes it's 'Down with Popery!' and
sometimes 'Liberty!' and sometimes 'Cotton, Slavery and States'
Rights!'"

"What on earth has the Pope to do with it?" thought Scarlett. "Or
Christ's tomb, either?"

But as she hurried toward the incensed group, she saw Rhett bow
jauntily and start toward the doorway through the crowd. She started
after him but Mrs. Elsing caught her skirt and held her.

"Let him go," she said in a clear voice that carried throughout the
tensely quiet room. "Let him go. He is a traitor, a speculator! He is a
viper that we have nursed to our bosoms!"

Rhett, standing in the hall, his hat in his hand, heard as he was
intended to hear and, turning, surveyed the room for a moment. He
looked pointedly at Mrs. Elsing's flat bosom, grinned suddenly and,
bowing, made his exit.


Mrs. Merriwether rode home in Aunt Pitty's carriage, and scarcely
had the four ladies seated themselves when she exploded.

"There now, Pittypat Hamilton! I hope you are satisfied!"

"With what?" cried Pitty, apprehensively.

"With the conduct of that wretched Butler man you've been
harboring."

Pittypat fluttered, too upset by the accusation to recall that Mrs.
Merriwether had also been Rhett Butler's hostess on several occasions.
Scarlett and Melanie thought of this, but bred to politeness to their
elders, refrained from remarking on the matter. Instead they studiously
looked down at their mittened hands.

"He insulted us all and the Confederacy too," said Mrs. Merriwether,
and her stout bust heaved violently beneath its glittering
passementerie trimmings. "Saying that we were fighting for money!
Saying that our leaders had lied to us! He should be put in jail. Yes,
he should. I shall speak to Dr. Meade about it. If Mr. Merriwether were
only alive, he'd tend to him! Now, Pitty Hamilton, you listen to me.
You mustn't ever let that scamp come into your house again!"

"Oh," mumbled Pitty, helplessly, looking as if she wished she were
dead. She looked appealingly at the two girls who kept their eyes cast
down and then hopefully toward Uncle Peter's erect back. She knew he
was listening attentively to every word and she hoped he would turn and
take a hand in the conversation, as he frequently did. She hoped he
would say: "Now, Miss Dolly, you let Miss Pitty be," but Peter made no
move. He disapproved heartily of Rhett Butler and poor Pitty knew it.
She sighed and said: "Well, Dolly, if you think—"

"I do think," returned Mrs. Merriwether firmly. "I can't imagine
what possessed you to receive him in the first place. After this
afternoon, there won't be a decent home in town that he'll be welcome
in. Do get up some gumption and forbid him your house."

She turned a sharp eye on the girls. "I hope you two are marking my
words," she continued, "for it's partly your fault, being so pleasant
to him. Just tell

=== SCENE 19 ===
s she had read had gone out of her
head as soon as she finished reading them. She believed Melanie had
simply taken leave of her senses.

"Ashley wrote me that we should not be fighting the Yankees. And
that we have been betrayed into it by statesmen and orators mouthing
catchwords and prejudices," said Melly rapidly. "He said nothing in the
world was worth what this war was going to do to us. He said here
wasn't anything at all to glory—it was just misery and dirt."

"Oh! That letter," thought Scarlett. "Was that what he meant?"

"I don't believe it," said Mrs. Merriwether firmly. "You
misunderstood his meaning."

"I never misunderstand Ashley," Melanie replied quietly, though her
lips were trembling. "I understand him perfectly. He meant exactly what
Captain Butler meant, only he didn't say it in a rude way."

"You should be ashamed of yourself, comparing a fine man like Ashley
Wilkes to a scoundrel like Captain Butler! I suppose you, too, think
the Cause is nothing!"

"I—I don't know what I think," Melanie began uncertainly, her fire
deserting her and panic at her outspokenness taking hold of her.
"I—I'd die for the Cause, like Ashley would. But—I mean— I mean,
I'll let the men folks do the thinking, because they are so much
smarter."

"I never heard the like," snorted Mrs. Merriwether. "Stop, Uncle
Peter, you're driving past my house!"

Uncle Peter, preoccupied with the conversation behind him, had
driven past the Merriwether carriage block and he backed up the horse.
Mrs. Merriwether alighted, her bonnet ribbons shaking like sails in a
storm.

"You'll be sorry," she said.

Uncle Peter whipped up the horse.

"You young misses ought ter tek shame, gittin' Miss Pitty in a
state," he scolded.

"I'm not in a state," replied Pitty, surprisingly, for less strain
than this had frequently brought on fainting fits. "Melly, honey, I
knew you were doing it just to take up for me and, really, I was glad
to see somebody take Dolly down a peg. She's so bossy. How did you have
the courage? But do you think you should have said that about
Ashley?"

"But it's true," answered Melanie and she began to cry softly. "And
I'm not ashamed that he thinks that way. He thinks the war is all wrong
but he's willing to fight and die anyway, and that takes lots more
courage than fighting for something you think is right."

"Lawd, Miss Melly, doan cry hyah on Peachtree Street," groaned Uncle
Peter, hastening his horse's pace. "Folks'll talk sumpin' scan'lous.
Wait till us gits home."

Scarlett said nothing. She did not even squeeze the hand that
Melanie had inserted into her palm for comfort. She had read Ashley's
letters for only one purpose—to assure herself that he still loved
her. Now Melanie had given a new meaning to passages in the letters
which Scarlett's eyes had barely seen. It shocked her to realize that
anyone as absolutely perfect as Ashley could have any thought in common
with such a reprobate as Rhett Butler. She thought: "They both see the
truth of this war, but Ashley is willing to die about it and Rhett
isn't. I think that shows Rhett's good sense." She paused a moment,
horror struck that she could have such a thought about Ashley. "They
both see the same unpleasant truth, but Rhett likes to look it in the
face and enrage people by talking about it—and Ashley can hardly bear
to face it."

It was very bewildering.

CHAPTER XIII

Under Mrs. Merriwether's goading, Dr. Meade took action, in the form
of a letter to the newspaper wherein he did not mention Rhett by name,
though his meaning was obvious. The editor, sensing the social drama of
the letter, put it on the second page of the paper, in itself a
startling innovation, as the first two pages of the paper were always
devoted to advertisements of slaves, mules, plows, coffins, houses for
sale or rent, cures for private diseases, abortifacients and
restoratives for lost manhood.

The doctor's letter was the first of a chorus of indignation that
was beginning to be heard all over the South against speculators,
profiteers and holders of government contracts. Conditions in
Wilmington, the chief blockade port, now that Charleston's port was
practically sealed by the Yankee gunboats, had reached the proportions
of an open scandal. Speculators swarmed Wilmington and, having the
ready cash, bought up boatloads of goods and held them for a rise in
prices. The rise always came, for with the increasing scarcity of
necessities, prices leaped higher by the month. The civilian population
had either to do without or buy at the speculators' prices, and the
poor and those in moderate circumstances were suffering increasing
hardships. With the rise in prices, Confederate money sank, and with
its rapid fall there rose a wild passion for luxuries. Blockaders were
commissioned to bring in necessities but now it was the higher-priced
luxuries that filled their boats to the exclusion of the things the
Confederacy vitally needed. People frenziedly bought these luxuries
with the money they had today, fearing that tomorrow's prices would be
higher and the money worthless.

To make matters worse, there was only one railroad line from
Wilmington to Richmond and, while thousands of barrels of flour and
boxes of bacon spoiled and rotted in wayside stations for want of
transportation, speculators with wines, taffetas and coffee to sell
seemed always able to get their goods to Richmond two days after they
were landed at Wilmington.

The rumor which had been creeping about underground was now being
openly discussed, that Rhett Butler not only ran his own four boats and
sold the cargoes at unheard-of prices but bought up the cargoes of
other boats and held them for rises in prices. It was said that he was
at the head of a combine worth more than a million dollars, with
Wilmington as its headquarters for the purpose of buying blockade goods
on the docks. They had dozens of warehouses in that city and in
Richmond, so the story ran, and the warehouses were crammed with food
and clothing that were being held for high

=== SCENE 20 ===
very name of blockader a
stench in the nostrils of all patriotic men. How can we endure these
scavengers in our midst with their varnished boots when our boys are
tramping barefoot into battle? How can we tolerate them with their
champagnes and their pates of Strasbourg when our soldiers are
shivering about their camp fires and gnawing moldy bacon? I call upon
every loyal Confederate to cast them out."

Atlanta read, knew the oracle had spoken, and, as loyal
Confederates, they hastened to cast Rhett out.

Of all the homes which had received him in the fall of 1862, Miss
Pittypat's was almost the only one into which he could enter in 1863.
And, except for Melanie, he probably would not have been received
there. Aunt Pitty was in a state whenever he was in town. She knew very
well what her friends were saying when she permitted him to call but
she still lacked the courage to tell him he was unwelcome. Each time he
arrived in Atlanta, she set her fat mouth and told the girls that she
would meet him at the door and forbid him to enter. And each time he
came, a little package in his hand and a compliment for her charm and
beauty on his lips, she wilted.

"I just don't know what to do," she would moan. "He just looks at me
and I—I'm scared to death of what he would do if I told him. He's got
such a bad reputation. Do you suppose he would strike me—or—or— Oh,
dear, if Charlie were only alive! Scarlett, YOU must tell him not to
call again—tell him in a nice way. Oh, me! I do believe you encourage
him, and the whole town is talking and, if your mother ever finds out,
what will she say to me? Melly, you must not be so nice to him. Be cool
and distant and he will understand. Oh, Melly, do you think I'd better
write Henry a note and ask him to speak to Captain Butler?"

"No, I don't," said Melanie. "And I won't be rude to him, either. I
think people are acting like chickens with their heads off about
Captain Butler. I'm sure he can't be all the bad things Dr. Meade and
Mrs. Merriwether say he is. He wouldn't hold food from starving people.
Why, he even gave me a hundred dollars for the orphans. I'm sure he's
just as loyal and patriotic as any of us and he's just too proud to
defend himself. You know how obstinate men are when they get their
backs up."

Aunt Pitty knew nothing about men, either with their backs up or
otherwise, and she could only wave her fat little hands helplessly. As
for Scarlett, she had long ago become resigned to Melanie's habit of
seeing good in everyone. Melanie was a fool, but there was nothing
anybody could do about it.

Scarlett knew that Rhett was not being patriotic and, though she
would have died rather than confess it, she did not care. The little
presents he brought her from Nassau, little oddments that a lady could
accept with propriety, were what mattered most to her. With prices as
high as they were, where on earth could she get needles and bonbons and
hairpins, if she forbade the house to him? No, it was easier to shift
the responsibility to Aunt Pitty, who after all was the head of the
house, the chaperon and the arbiter of morals. Scarlett knew the town
gossiped about Rhett's calls, and about her too; but she also knew that
in the eyes of Atlanta Melanie Wilkes could do no wrong, and if Melanie
defended Rhett his calls were still tinged with respectability.

However, life would be pleasanter if Rhett would recant his
heresies. She wouldn't have to suffer the embarrassment of seeing him
cut openly when she walked down Peachtree Street with him.

"Even if you think such things, why do you say them?" she scolded.
"If you'd just think what you please but keep your mouth shut,
everything would be so much nicer."

"That's your system, isn't it, my green-eyed hypocrite? Scarlett,
Scarlett! I hoped for more courageous conduct from you. I thought the
Irish said what they thought and the Divvil take the hindermost. Tell
me truthfully, don't you sometimes almost burst from keeping your mouth
shut?"

"Well—yes," Scarlett confessed reluctantly. "I do get awfully bored
when they talk about the Cause, morning, noon and night. But goodness,
Rhett Butler, if I admitted it nobody would speak to me and none of the
boys would dance with me!"

"Ah, yes, and one must be danced with, at all costs. Well, I admire
your self-control but I do not find myself equal to it. Nor can I
masquerade in a cloak of romance and patriotism, no matter how
convenient it might be. There are enough stupid patriots who are
risking every cent they have in the blockade and who are going to come
out of this war paupers. They don't need me among their number, eit

=== SCENE 21 ===
r. Meade
who tell me our Cause is just and holy? And get so excited by the roll
of drums that I'll grab a musket and rush off to Virginia to shed my
blood for Marse Robert? What kind of a fool do you think I am? Kissing
the rod that chastised me is not in my line. The South and I are even
now. The South threw me out to starve once. I haven't starved, and I am
making enough money out of the South's death throes to compensate me
for my lost birthright."

"I think you are vile and mercenary," said Scarlett, but her remark
was automatic. Most of what he was saying went over her head, as did
any conversation that was not personal. But part of it made sense.
There were such a lot of foolish things about life among nice people.
Having to pretend that her heart was in the grave when it wasn't. And
how shocked everybody had been when she danced at the bazaar. And the
infuriating way people lifted their eyebrows every time she did or said
anything the least bit different from what every other young woman did
and said. But still, she was jarred at hearing him attack the very
traditions that irked her most. She had lived too long among people who
dissembled politely not to feel disturbed at hearing her own thoughts
put into words.

"Mercenary? No, I'm only farsighted. Though perhaps that is merely a
synonym for mercenary. At least, people who were not as farsighted as I
will call it that. Any loyal Confederate who had a thousand dollars in
cash in 1861 could have done what I did, but how few were mercenary
enough to take advantage of their opportunities! As for instance, right
after Fort Sumter fell and before the blockade was established, I
bought up several thousand bales of cotton at dirt-cheap prices and ran
them to England. They are still there in warehouses in Liverpool. I've
never sold them. I'm holding them until the English mills have to have
cotton and will give me any price I ask. I wouldn't be surprised if I
got a dollar a pound."

"You'll get a dollar a pound when elephants roost in trees!"

"I'll believe I'll get it. Cotton is at seventy-two cents a pound
already. I'm going to be a rich man when this war is over, Scarlett,
because I was farsighted—pardon me, mercenary. I told you once before
that there were two times for making big money, one in the upbuilding
of a country and the other in its destruction. Slow money on the
upbuilding, fast money in the crack-up. Remember my words. Perhaps they
may be of use to you some day."

"I do appreciate good advice so much," said Scarlett, with all the
sarcasm she could muster. "But I don't need your advice. Do you think
Pa is a pauper? He's got all the money I'll ever need and then I have
Charles' property besides."

"I imagine the French aristocrats thought practically the same thing
until the very moment when they climbed into the tumbrils."


Frequently Rhett pointed out to Scarlett the inconsistency of her
wearing black mourning clothes when she was participating in all social
activities. He liked bright colors and Scarlett's funeral dresses and
the crepe veil that hung from her bonnet to her heels both amused him
and offended him. But she clung to her dull black dresses and her veil,
knowing that if she changed them for colors without waiting several
more years, the town would buzz even more than it was already buzzing.
And besides, how would she ever explain to her mother?

Rhett said frankly that the crepe veil made her look like a crow and
the black dresses added ten years to her age. This ungallant statement
sent her flying to the mirror to see if she really did look
twenty-eight instead of eighteen.

"I should think you'd have more pride than to try to look like Mrs.
Merriwether," he taunted. "And better taste than to wear that veil to
advertise a grief I'm sure you never felt. I'll lay a wager with you.
I'll have that bonnet and veil off your head and a Paris creation on it
within two months."

"Indeed, no, and don't let's discuss it any further," said Scarlett,
annoyed by his reference to Charles. Rhett, who was preparing to leave
for Wilmington for another trip abroad, departed with a grin on his
face.

One bright summer morning some weeks later, he reappeared with a
brightly trimmed hatbox in his hand and, after finding that Scarlett
was alone in the house, he opened it. Wrapped in layers of tissue was a
bonnet, a creation that made her cry: "Oh, the darling thing!" as she
reached for it. Starved for the sight, much less the touch, of new
clothes, it seemed the loveliest bonnet she had ever seen. It was of
dark-green taffeta, lined with water silk of a pale-jade color. The
ribbons that tied under the chin were as wide as her hand and they,
too, were pale green. And, curled about the brim of this confection was
the perkiest of green ostrich plumes.

"Put it on," said Rhett, smiling.

She flew across the room to the mirror and plopped it on her head,
pushing back her hair to show her earrings and tying the ribbon under
her chin.

"How do I look?" she cried, pirouetting for his benefit and tossing
her head so that the plume danced. But she knew she looked pretty even
before she saw confirmation in his eyes. She looked attractively saucy
and the green of the lining made her eyes dark emerald and
sparkling.

"Oh, Rhett, whose bonnet is it? I'll buy it. I'll give you every
cent I've got for it."

"It's your bonnet," he said. "Who else could wear that shade of
green? Don't you think I carried the color of your eyes well in my
mind?"

"Did you really have it trimmed just for me?"

"Yes, and there's 'Rue de la Paix' on the box, if that means
anything to you."

It meant nothing to her, smiling at her reflection in the mirror.
Just at this moment, nothing mattered to her except that she looked
utterly charming in the first pretty hat she had put on her head in two
years. What she couldn't do with this hat! And then her smile
faded.

"Don't you like it?"

"Oh, it's a dream but— Oh, I do hate to have to cover this lovely
green with crepe and dye the feather black."

He was beside her quickly and his deft fingers untied the wide bow
under her chin. In a moment the hat was back in its box.

"What are you doing? You said it was mine."

"But not to change to a mourning bonnet. I shall find some other
charming lady with green eyes who appreciates my taste."

"Oh, you shan't! I'll die if I don't have it! Oh, please, Rhett,
don't be mean! Let me have it."

"And turn it into a fright like your other hats? No."

She clutched at the box. That sweet thing that made her look so
young and enchanting to be given to some other girl? Oh, never! For a
moment she thought of the horror of Pitty and Melanie. She thought of
Ellen and what she would say, and she shivered. But vanity was
stronger.

"I won't change it. I promise. Now, do let me have it."

He gave her the box with a slightly sardonic smile and watched her
while she put it on again and preened herself.

"How much is it?" she asked suddenly, her face falling. "I have only
fifty dollars but next month—"

"It would cost about two thousand dollars, Confederate money," he
said with a grin at her woebegone expression.

"Oh, dear— Well, suppose I give you the fifty now and then when I
get—"

"I don't want any money for it," he said. "It's a gift."

Scarlett's mouth dropped open. The line was so closely, so carefully
drawn where gifts from men were concerned.

"Candy and flowers, dear," Ellen had said time and again, "and
perhaps a book of poetry or an album or a small bottle of Florida water
are the only things a lady may accept from a gentleman. Never, never
any expensive gift, even from your fiance. And never any gift of
jewelry or wearing apparel, not even gloves or handkerchiefs. Should
you accept such gifts, men would know you were no lady and would try to
take liberties."

"Oh, dear," thought Scarlett, looking first at herself in the mirror
and then at Rhett's unreadable face. "I simply can't tell him I won't
accept it. It's too darling. I'd—I'd almost rather he took a liberty,
if it was a very small one." Then she was horrified at herself for
having such a thought and she turned pink.

"I'll—I'll give you the fifty dollars—"

"If you do I will throw it in the gutter. Or, better still buy
masses for your soul. I'm sure your soul could do with a few
masses."

She laughed unwillingly, and the laughing reflection under the green
brim decided her instantly.

"Whatever are you trying to do to me?"

"I'm tempting you with fine gifts until your girlish ideals are
quite worn away and you are at my mercy," he said. "'Accept only candy
and flowers from gentlemen, dearie,'" he mimicked, and she burst into a
giggle.

"You are a clever, black-hearted wretch, Rhett Butler, and you know
very well this bonnet's too pretty to be refused."

His eyes mocked her, even while they complimented her beauty.

"Of course, you can tell Miss Pitty that you gave me a sample of
taffeta and green silk and drew a picture of the bonnet and I extorted
fifty dollars from you for it."

"No. I shall say one hundred dollars and she'll tell everybody in
town and everybody will be green with envy and talk about my
extravagance. But Rhett, you mustn't bring me anything else so
expensive. It's awfully kind of you, but I really couldn't accept
anything else."

"Indeed? Well, I shall bring you presents so long as it pleases me
and so long as I see things that will enhance your charms. I shall
bring you dark-green watered silk for a frock to match the bonnet. And
I warn you that I am not kind. I am tempting you with bonnets and
bangles and leading you into a pit. Always remember I never do anything
without reason and I never give anything without expecting something in
return. I always get paid."

His black eyes sought her face and traveled to her lips.

Scarlett cast down her eyes, excitement filling her. Now, he was
going to try to take liberties, just as Ellen predicted. He was going
to kiss her, or try to kiss her, and she couldn't quite make up her
flurried mind which it should be. If she refused, he might jerk the
bonnet right off her head and give it to some other girl. On the other
hand, if she permitted one chaste peck, he might bring her other lovely
presents in the hope of getting another kiss. Men set such a store by
kisses, though Heaven alone knew why. And lots of times, after one kiss
they fell completely in love with a girl and made most entertaining
spectacles of themselves, provided the girl was clever and withheld her
kisses after the first one. It would be exciting to have Rhett Butler
in love with her and admitting it and begging for a kiss or a smile.
Yes, she would let him kiss her.

But he made no move to kiss her. She gave him a sidelong glance from
under her lashes and murmured encouragingly.

"So you always get paid, do you? And what do you expect to get from
me?"

"That remains to be seen."

"Well, if you think I'll marry you to pay for the bonnet, I won't,"
she said daringly and gave her head a saucy flirt that set the plume to
bobbing.

His white teeth g

=== SCENE 22 ===
you, either."

"Then why is your mouth all pursed up in that ridiculous way?"

"Oh!" she cried as she caught a glimpse of herself and saw that her
red lips were indeed in the proper pose for a kiss. "Oh!" she cried
again, losing her temper and stamping her foot. "You are the horridest
man I have ever seen and I don't care if I never lay eyes on you
again!"

"If you really felt that way, you'd stamp on the bonnet. My, what a
passion you are in and it's quite becoming, as you probably know. Come,
Scarlett, stamp on the bonnet to show me what you think of me and my
presents."

"Don't you dare touch this bonnet," she said, clutching it by the
bow and retreating. He came after her, laughing softly and took her
hands in his.

"Oh, Scarlett, you are so young you wring my heart," he said. "And I
shall kiss you, as you seem to expect it," and leaning down carelessly,
his mustache just grazed her cheek. "Now, do you feel that you must
slap me to preserve the proprieties?"

Her lips mutinous, she looked up into his eyes and saw so much
amusement in their dark depths that she burst into laughter. What a
tease he was and how exasperating! If he didn't want to marry her and
didn't even want to kiss her, what did he want? If he wasn't in love
with her, why did he call so often and bring her presents?

"That's better," he said. "Scarlett, I'm a bad influence on you and
if you have any sense you will send me packing—if you can. I'm very
hard to get rid of. But I'm bad for you."

"Are you?"

"Can't you see it? Ever since I met you at the bazaar, your career
has been most shocking and I'm to blame for most of it. Who encouraged
you to dance? Who forced you to admit that you thought our glorious
Cause was neither glorious nor sacred? Who goaded you into admitting
that you thought men were fools to die for high-sounding principles?
Who has aided you in giving the old ladies plenty to gossip about? Who
is getting you out of mourning several years too soon? And who, to end
all this, has lured you into accepting a gift which no lady can accept
and still remain a lady?"

"You flatter yourself, Captain Butler. I haven't done anything so
scandalous and I'd have done everything you mentioned without your aid
anyway."

"I doubt that," he said and his face went suddenly quiet and somber.
"You'd still be the broken-hearted widow of Charles Hamilton and famed
for your good deeds among the wounded. Eventually, however—"

But she was not listening, for she was regarding herself pleasedly
in the mirror again, thinking she would wear the bonnet to the hospital
this very afternoon and take flowers to the convalescent officers.

That there was truth in his last words did not occur to her. She did
not see that Rhett had pried open the prison of her widowhood and set
her free to queen it over unmarried girls when her days as a belle
should have been long past. Nor did she see that under his influence
she had come a long way from Ellen's teachings. The change had been so
gradual, the flouting of one small convention seeming to have no
connection with the flouting of another, and none of them any
connection with Rhett. She did not realize that, with his
encouragement, she had disregarded many of the sternest injunctions of
her mother concerning the proprieties, forgotten the difficult lessons
in being a lady.

She only saw that the bonnet was the most becoming one she ever had,
that it had not cost her a penny and that Rhett must be in love with
her, whether he admitted it or not. And she certainly intended to find
a way to make him admit it.


The next day, Scarlett was standing in front of the mirror with a
comb in her hand and her mouth full of hairpins, attempting a new
coiffure which Maybelle, fresh from a visit to her husband in Richmond,
had said was the rage at the Capital. It was called "Cats, Rats and
Mice" and presented many difficulties. The hair was parted in the
middle and arranged in three rolls of graduating size on each side of
the head, the largest, nearest the part, being the "cat." The "cat" and
the "rat" were easy to fix but the "mice" kept slipping out of her
hairpins in an exasperating manner. However, she was determined to
accomplish it, for Rhett was coming to supper and he always noticed and
commented upon any innovation of dress or hair.

As she struggled with her bushy, obstinate locks, perspiration
beading her forehead, she heard light running feet in the downstairs
hall and knew that Melanie was home from the hospital. As she heard her
fly up the stairs, two at a time, she paused, hairpin in mid-air,
realizing that something must be wrong, for Melanie always moved as
decorously as a dowager. She went to the door and threw it o

=== SCENE 23 ===
ase,
Mrs. Wilkes, do speak a minute with me.' I don't know how she knew my
name. I knew I ought to run as hard as I could but—well, Scarlett, she
looked so sad and—well, sort of pleading. And she had on a black dress
and black bonnet and no paint and really looked decent but for that red
hair. And before I could answer she said. 'I know I shouldn't speak to
you but I tried to talk to that old peahen, Mrs. Elsing, and she ran me
away from the hospital.'"

"Did she really call her a peahen?" said Scarlett pleasedly and
laughed.

"Oh, don't laugh. It isn't funny. It seems that Miss—this woman,
wanted to do something for the hospital—can you imagine it? She
offered to nurse every morning and, of course, Mrs. Elsing must have
nearly died at the idea and ordered her out of the hospital. And then
she said, 'I want to do something, too. Ain't I a Confedrut, good as
you?' And, Scarlett, I was right touched at her wanting to help. You
know, she can't be all bad if she wants to help the Cause. Do you think
I'm bad to feel that way?"

"For Heaven's sake, Melly, who cares if you're bad? What else did
she say?"

"She said she'd been watching the ladies go by to the hospital and
thought I had—a—a kind face and so she stopped me. She had some money
and she wanted me to take it and use it for the hospital and not tell a
soul where it came from. She said Mrs. Elsing wouldn't let it be used
if she knew what kind of money it was. What kind of money! That's when
I thought I'd swoon! And I was so upset and anxious to get away, I just
said: 'Oh, yes, indeed, how sweet of you' or something idiotic, and she
smiled and said: 'That's right Christian of you' and shoved this dirty
handkerchief into my hand. Ugh, can you smell the perfume?"

Melanie held out a man's handkerchief, soiled and highly perfumed,
in which some coins were knotted.

"She was saying thank you and something about bringing me some money
every week and just then Uncle Peter drove up and saw me!" Melly
collapsed into tears and laid her head on the pillow. "And when he saw
who was with me, he—Scarlett, he HOLLERED at me! Nobody has ever
hollered at me before in my whole life. And he said, 'You git in dis
hyah cah'ige dis minute!' Of course, I did, and all the way home he
blessed me out and wouldn't let me explain and said he was going to
tell Aunt Pitty. Scarlett, do go down and beg him not to tell her.
Perhaps he will listen to you. It will kill Auntie if she knows I ever
even looked that woman in the face. Will you?"

"Yes, I will. But let's see how much money is in here. It feels
heavy."

She untied the knot and a handful of gold coins rolled out on the
bed.

"Scarlett, there's fifty dollars here! And in gold!" cried Melanie,
awed, as she counted the bright pieces. "Tell me, do you think it's all
right to use this kind—well, money made—er—this way for the boys?
Don't you think that maybe God will understand that she wanted to help
and won't care if it is tainted? When I think of how many things the
hospital needs—"

But Scarlett was not listening. She was looking at the dirty
handkerchief, and humiliation and fury were filling her. There was a
monogram in the corner in which were the initials "R. K. B." In her top
drawer was a handkerchief just like this, one that Rhett Butler had
lent her only yesterday to wrap about the stems of wild flowers they
had picked. She had planned to return it to him when he came to supper
tonight.

So Rhett consorted with that vile Watling creature and gave her
money. That was where the contribution to the hospital came from.
Blockade gold. And to think that Rhett would have the gall to look a
decent woman in the face after being with that creature! And to think
that she could have believed he was in love with her! This proved he
couldn't be.

Bad women and all they involved were mysterious and revolting
matters to her. She knew that men patronized these women for purposes
which no lady should mention—or, if she did mention them, in whispers
and by indirection and euphemism. She had always thought that only
common vulgar men visited such women. Before this moment, it had never
occurred to her that nice men— that is, men she met at nice homes and
with whom she danced—could possibly do such things. It opened up an
entirely new field of thought and one that was horrifying. Perhaps all
men did this! It was bad enough that they forced their wives to go
through such indecent performances but to actually seek out low women
and pay them for such accommodation! Oh, men were so vile, and Rhett
Butler was the worst of them all!

She would take this handkerchief and fling it in his face and show
him the door and never, never speak to him again. But no, of course she
couldn't do that. She could never, never let him know she even realized
that bad women existed, much less that he visited them. A lady could
never do that.

"Oh," she thought in fury. "If I just wasn't a lady, what wouldn't I
tell that varmint!"

And, crumbling the handkerchief in her hand, she went down the
stairs to

=== SCENE 24 ===
ght be falling like
grain before a hailstorm, but the Cause for which they fought could
never fall. They might be dying in thousands but, like the fruit of the
dragon's teeth, thousands of fresh men in gray and butternut with the
Rebel yell on their lips would spring up from the earth to take their
places. Where these men would come from, no one knew. They only knew,
as surely as they knew there was a just and jealous God in Heaven, that
Lee was miraculous and the Army of Virginia invincible.


Scarlett, Melanie and Miss Pittypat sat in front of the Daily
Examiner office in the carriage with the top back, sheltered beneath
their parasols. Scarlett's hands shook so that her parasol wobbled
above her head, Pitty was so excited her nose quivered in her round
face like a rabbit's, but Melanie sat as though carved of stone, her
dark eyes growing larger and larger as time went by. She made only one
remark in two hours, as she took a vial of smelling salts from her
reticule and handed it to her aunt, the only time she had ever spoken
to her, in her whole life, with anything but tenderest affection.

"Take this, Auntie, and use it if you feel faint. I warn you if you
do faint you'll just have to faint and let Uncle Peter take you home,
for I'm not going to leave this place till I hear about—till I hear.
And I'm not going to let Scarlett leave me, either."

Scarlett had no intention of leaving, no intention of placing
herself where she could not have the first news of Ashley. No, even if
Miss Pitty died, she wouldn't leave this spot. Somewhere, Ashley was
fighting, perhaps dying, and the newspaper office was the only place
where she could learn the truth.

She looked about the crowd, picking out friends and neighbors, Mrs.
Meade with her bonnet askew and her arm through that of fifteen-
year-old Phil; the Misses McLure trying to make their trembling upper
lips cover their buck teeth; Mrs. Elsing, erect as a Spartan mother,
betraying her inner turmoil only by the straggling gray locks that hung
from her chignon; and Fanny Elsing white as a ghost. (Surely Fanny
wouldn't be so worried about her brother Hugh. Had she a real beau at
the front that no one suspected?) Mrs. Merriwether sat in her carriage
patting Maybelle's hand. Maybelle looked so very pregnant it was a
disgrace for her to be out in public, even if she did have her shawl
carefully draped over her. Why should she be so worried? Nobody had
heard that the Louisiana troops were in Pennsylvania. Probably her
hairy little Zouave was safe in Richmond this very minute.

There was a movement on the outskirts of the crowd and those on foot
gave way as Rhett Butler carefully edged his horse toward Aunt Pitty's
carriage. Scarlett thought: He's got courage, coming here at this time
when it wouldn't take anything to make this mob tear him to pieces
because he isn't in uniform. As he came nearer, she thought she might
be the first to rend him. How dared he sit there on that fine horse, in
shining boots and handsome white linen suit, so sleek and well fed,
smoking an expensive cigar, when Ashley and all the other boys were
fighting the Yankees, barefooted, sweltering in the heat, hungry, their
bellies rotten with disease?

Bitter looks were thrown at him as he came slowly through the press.
Old men growled in their beards, and Mrs. Merriwether who feared
nothing rose slightly in her carriage and said clearly: "Speculator!"
in a tone that made the word the foulest and most venomous of epithets.
He paid no heed to anyone but raised his hat to Melly and Aunt Pitty
and, riding to Scarlett's side, leaned down and whispered: "Don't you
think this would be the time for Dr. Meade to give us his familiar
speech about victory perching like a screaming eagle on our
banners?"

Her nerves taut with suspense, she turned on him as swiftly as an
angry cat, hot words bubbling to her lips, but he stopped them with a
gesture.

"I came to tell you ladies," he said loudly, "that I have been to
headquarters and the first casualty lists are coming in."

At these words a hum rose among those near enough to hear his
remark, and the crowd surged, ready to turn and run down Whitehall
Street toward headquarters.

"Don't go," he called, rising in his saddle and holding up his hand.
"The lists have been sent to both newspapers and are now being printed.
Stay where you are!"

"Oh, Captain Butler," cried Melly, turning to him with tears in her
eyes. "How kind of you to come and tell us! When will they be
posted?"

"They should be out any minute, Madam. The reports have been in the
offices for half an hour now. The major in charge didn't want to let
that out until the printing was done, for fear the crowd would wreck
the offices trying to get news. Ah! Look!"

The side window of the newspaper office opened and a hand was
extended, bearing a sheaf of long narrow galley proofs, smeared with
fresh ink and thick with names closely printed. The crowd fought for
them, tearing the slips in half, those obtaining them trying to back
out through the crowd to read, those behind pushing forward, crying:
"Let me through!"

"Hold the reins," said Rhett shortly, swinging to the ground and
tossing the bridle to Uncle Peter. They saw his heavy shoulders
towering above the crowd as he went through, brutally pushing and
shoving. In a while he was back, with half a dozen in his hands. He
tossed one to Melanie and distributed the others among the ladies in
the nearest carriages, the Misses McLure, Mrs. Meade, Mrs. Merriwether,
Mrs. Elsing.

"Quick, Melly," cried Scarlett, her heart in her throat,
exasperation sweeping her as she saw that Melly'

=== SCENE 25 ===
er cared. "Oh, Mrs. Meade! Rene—" Her voice changed, swiftly,
"Melly, look!—Mrs. Meade, please! Darcy isn't—?"

Mrs. Meade was looking down into her lap and she did not raise her
head when her name was called, but the face of little Phil beside her
was an open book that all might read.

"There, there, Mother," he said, helplessly. Mrs. Meade looked up,
meeting Melanie's eyes.

"He won't need those boots now," she said.

"Oh, darling!" cried Melly, beginning to sob, as she shoved Aunt
Pitty onto Scarlett's shoulder and scrambled out of the carriage and
toward that of the doctor's wife.

"Mother, you've still got me," said Phil, in a forlorn effort at
comforting the white-faced woman beside him. "And if you'll just let
me, I'll go kill all the Yank—"

Mrs. Meade clutched his arm as if she would never let it go, said
"No!" in a strangled voice and seemed to choke.

"Phil Meade, you hush your mouth!" hissed Melanie, climbing in
beside Mrs. Meade and taking her in her arms. "Do you think it'll help
your mother to have you off getting shot too? I never heard anything so
silly. Drive us home, quick!"

She turned to Scarlett as Phil picked up the reins.

"As soon as you take Auntie home, come over to Mrs. Meade's. Captain
Butler, can you get word to the doctor? He's at the hospital."

The carriage moved off through the dispersing crowd. Some of the
women were weeping with joy, but most looked too stunned to realize the
heavy blows that had fallen upon them. Scarlett bent her head over the
blurred lists, reading rapidly, to find names of friends. Now that
Ashley was safe she could think of other people. Oh, how long the list
was! How heavy the toll from Atlanta, from all of Georgia.

Good Heavens! "Calvert—Raiford, Lieutenant." Raif! Suddenly she
remembered the day, so long ago, when they had run away together but
decided to come home at nightfall because they were hungry and afraid
of the dark.

"Fontaine—Joseph K., private." Little bad-tempered Joe! And Sally
hardly over having her baby!

"Munroe—LaFayette, Captain." And Lafe had been engaged to Cathleen
Calvert. Poor Cathleen! Hers had been a double loss, a brother and a
sweetheart. But Sally's loss was greater—a brother and a husband.

Oh, this was too terrible. She was almost afraid to read further.
Aunt Pitty was heaving and sighing on her shoulder and, with small
ceremony, Scarlett pushed her over into a corner of the carriage and
continued her reading.

Surely, surely—there couldn't be three "Tarleton" names on that
list. Perhaps—perhaps the hurried printer had repeated the name by
error. But no. There they were. "Tarleton—Brenton, Lieutenant."
"Tarleton—Stuart, Corporal." "Tarleton—Thomas, private." And Boyd,
dead the first year of the war, was buried God knew where in Virginia.
All the Tarleton boys gone. Tom and the lazy long-legged twins with
their love of gossip and their absurd practical jokes and Boyd who had
the grace of a dancing master and the tongue of a wasp.

She could not read any more. She could not know if any other of
those boys with whom she had grown up, danced, flirted, kissed were on
that list. She wished that she could cry, do something to ease the iron
fingers that were digging into her throat.

"I'm sorry, Scarlett," said Rhett. She looked up at him. She had
forgotten he was still there. "Many of your friends?"

She nodded and struggled to speak: "About every family in the
County—and all—all three of the Tarleton boys."

His face was quiet, almost somber, and there was no mocking in his
eyes.

"And the end is not yet," he said. "These are just the first lists
and they're incomplete. There'll be a longer list tomorrow." He lowered
his voice so that those in the near-by carriages could not hear.
"Scarlett, General Lee must have lost the battle. I heard at
headquarters that he had retreated back into Maryland."

She raised frightened eyes to his, but her fear did not spring from
Lee's defeat. Longer casualty lists tomorrow! Tomorrow. She had not
thought of tomorrow, so happy was she at first that Ashley's name was
not on that list. Tomorrow. Why, right this minute he might be dead and
she would not know it until tomorrow, or perhaps a week from
tomorrow.

"Oh, Rhett, why do there have to be wars? It would have been so much
better for the Yankees to pay for the darkies—or even for us to give
them the darkies free of charge than to have this happen."

"It isn't the darkies, Scarlett. They're just the excuse. There'll
always be wars because men love wars. Women don't, but men do—yea,
passing the love of women."

His mouth twisted in his old smile and the seriousness was gone from
his face. He lifted his wide Panama hat.

"Good-by. I'm going to find Dr. Meade. I imagine the irony of me
being the one to tell him of his son's death will be lost on him, just
now. But later, he'll probably hate to think that a speculator brought
the news of a hero's death."


Scarlett put Miss Pitty to bed with a toddy, left Prissy and Cookie
in attendance and went down the street to the Meade house. Mrs. Meade
was upstairs with Phil, waiting her husband's return, and Melanie sat
in the parlor, talking in a low voice to a group of sympathetic
neighbors. She was busy with needle and scissors, altering a mourning
dress that Mrs. Elsing had lent to Mrs. Meade. Already the house was
full of the acrid smell of clothes boiling in homemade black dye for,
in the kitchen, the sobbing cook was stirring all of Mrs. Meade's
dresses in the huge wash pot.

"How is she?" questioned Scarlett softly.

"Not a tear," said Melanie. "It's terrible when women can't cry. I
don't know how men stand things without crying. I guess it's because
they're stronger and braver than women. She says she's going to
Pennsylvania by herself to bring him home. The doctor can't leave the
hospital."

"It will be dreadful for her! Why can't Phil go?"

"She's afraid he'll join the army if he gets out of her sight. You
know he's so big for his age and they're taking them at sixteen
now."

One by one the neighbors slipped away, reluctant to be present when
the doctor came home, and Scarlett and Melanie were left alone, sewing
in the parlor. Melanie looked sad but tranquil, though tears dropped
down on the cloth she held in her hands. Evidently she had not thought
that the battle might still be going on and Ashley perhaps dead at this
very moment. With panic in her heart, Scarlett did not know whether to
tell Melanie of Rhett's words and have the dubious comfort of her
misery or keep it to herself. Finally she decided to remain quiet. It
would never do for Melanie to think her too worried about Ashley. She
thanked God that everyone, Melly and Pitty included, had been too
engrossed in her own worries that morning to notice her conduct.

After an interval of silent sewing, they heard sounds outside and,
peering through the curtains, they saw Dr. Meade alighting from his
horse. His shoulders were sagging and his h

=== SCENE 26 ===
w our appreciation of his talking the provost guard out of
putting us in jail. If you say the word, we'll take the mustache off
for you, right now."

"Oh, no, thank you!" said Melanie hastily, clutching Ashley in a
frightened way, for the two swarthy little men looked capable of any
violence. "I think it's perfectly lovely."

"That's love," said the Fontaines, nodding gravely at each
other.

When Ashley went into the cold to see the boys off to the depot in
Aunt Pitty's carriage, Melanie caught Scarlett's arm.

"Isn't his uniform dreadful? Won't my coat be a surprise? Oh, if
only I had enough cloth for britches too!"

That coat for Ashley was a sore subject with Scarlett, for she
wished so ardently that she and not Melanie were bestowing it as a
Christmas gift. Gray wool for uniforms was now almost literally more
priceless than rubies, and Ashley was wearing the familiar homespun.
Even butternut was now none too plentiful, and many of the soldiers
were dressed in captured Yankee uniforms which had been turned a
dark-brown color with walnut-shell dye. But Melanie, by rare luck, had
come into possession of enough gray broadcloth to make a coat—a rather
short coat but a coat just the same. She had nursed a Charleston boy in
the hospital and when he died had clipped a lock of his hair and sent
it to his mother, along with the scant contents of his pockets and a
comforting account of his last hours which made no mention of the
torment in which he died. A correspondence had sprung up between them
and, learning that Melanie had a husband at the front, the mother had
sent her the length of gray cloth and brass buttons which she had
bought for her dead son. It was a beautiful piece of material, thick
and warm and with a dull sheen to it, undoubtedly blockade goods and
undoubtedly very expensive. It was now in the hands of the tailor and
Melanie was hurrying him to have it ready by Christmas morning.
Scarlett would have given anything to be able to provide the rest of
the uniform, but the necessary materials were simply not to be had in
Atlanta.

She had a Christmas present for Ashley, but it paled in
insignificance beside the glory of Melanie's gray coat. It was a small
"housewife," made of flannel, containing the whole precious pack of
needles Rhett had brought her from Nassau, three of her linen
handkerchiefs, obtained from the same source, two spools of thread and
a small pair of scissors. But she wanted to give him something more
personal, something a wife could give a husband, a shirt, a pair of
gauntlets, a hat. Oh, yes, a hat by all means. That little flat-topped
forage cap Ashley was wearing looked ridiculous. Scarlett had always
hated them. What if Stonewall Jackson had worn one in preference to a
slouch felt? That didn't make them any more dignified looking. But the
only hats obtainable in Atlanta were crudely made wool hats, and they
were tackier than the monkey-hat forage caps.

When she thought of hats, she thought of Rhett Butler. He had so
many hats, wide Panamas for summer, tall beavers for formal occasions,
hunting hats, slouch hats of tan and black and blue. What need had he
for so many when her darling Ashley rode in the rain with moisture
dripping down his collar from the back of his cap?

"I'll make Rhett give me that new black felt of his," she decided.
"And I'll put a gray ribbon around the brim and sew Ashley's wreath on
it and it will look lovely."

She paused and thought it might be difficult to get the hat without
some explanation. She simply could not tell Rhett she wanted it for
Ashley. He would raise his brows in that nasty way he always had when
she even mentioned Ashley's name and, like as not, would refuse to give
her the hat. Well, she'd make up some pitiful story about a soldier in
the hospital who needed it and Rhett need never know the truth.

All that afternoon, she maneuvered to be alone with Ashley, even for
a few minutes, but Melanie was beside him constantly, and India and
Honey, their pale lashless eyes glowing, followed him about the house.
Even John Wilkes, visibly proud of his son, had no opportunity for
quiet conversation with him.

It was the same at supper where they all plied him with questions
about the war. The war! Who cared about the war? Scarlett didn't think
Ashley cared very much f

=== SCENE 27 ===
n the few
minutes that remained might be snatched away from her if Melanie
followed him to the door, to the carriage block. Why hadn't she made
the opportunity during this last week? But always, Melanie was at his
side, her eyes caressing him adoringly, always friends and neighbors
and relatives were in the house and, from morning till night, Ashley
was never alone. Then, at night, the door of the bedroom closed and he
was alone with Melanie. Never once during these last days had he
betrayed to Scarlett by one look, one word, anything but the affection
a brother might show a sister or a friend, a lifelong friend. She could
not let him go away, perhaps forever, without knowing whether he still
loved her. Then, even if he died, she could nurse the warm comfort of
his secret love to the end of her days.

After what seemed an eternity of waiting, she heard the sound of his
boots in the bedroom above and the door opening and closing. She heard
him coming down the steps. Alone! Thank God for that! Melanie must be
too overcome by the grief of parting to leave her room. Now she would
have him for herself for a few precious minutes.

He came down the steps slowly, his spurs clinking, and she could
hear the slap-slap of his saber against his high boots. When he came
into the parlor, his eyes were somber. He was trying to smile but his
face was as white and drawn as a man bleeding from an internal wound.
She rose as he entered, thinking with proprietary pride that he was the
handsomest soldier she had ever seen. His long holster and belt
glistened and his silver spurs and scabbard gleamed, from the
industrious polishing Uncle Peter had given them. His new coat did not
fit very well, for the tailor had been hurried and some of the seams
were awry. The bright new sheen of the gray coat was sadly at variance
with the worn and patched butternut trousers and the scarred boots, but
if he had been clothed in silver armor he could not have looked more
the shining knight to her.

"Ashley," she begged abruptly, "may I go to the train with you?"

"Please don't. Father and the girls will be there. And anyway, I'd
rather remember you saying good-by to me here than shivering at the
depot. There's so much to memories."

Instantly she abandoned her plan. If India and Honey who disliked
her so much were to be present at the leave taking, she would have no
chance for a private word.

"Then I won't go," she said. "See, Ashley! I've another present for
you."

A little shy, now that the time had come to give it to him, she
unrolled the package. It was a long yellow sash, made of thick China
silk and edged with heavy fringe. Rhett Butler had brought her a yellow
shawl from Havana several months before, a shawl gaudily embroidered
with birds and flowers in magenta and blue. During this last week, she
had patiently picked out all the embroidery and cut up the square of
silk and stitched it into a sash length.

"Scarlett, it's beautiful! Did you make it yourself? Then I'll value
it all the more. Put it on me, my dear. The boys will be green with
envy when they see me in the glory of my new coat and sash."

She wrapped

=== SCENE 28 ===
mine away and be barefooted too."

"Oh, Ashley, promise me you won't give them away!"

"When I see things like that and then look at the Yankees—then I
see the end of everything. Why Scarlett, the Yankees are buying
soldiers from Europe by the thousands! Most of the prisoners we've
taken recently can't even speak English. They're Germans and Poles and
wild Irishmen who talk Gaelic. But when we lose a man, he can't be
replaced. When our shoes wear out, there are no more shoes. We're
bottled up, Scarlett. And we can't fight the whole world."

She thought wildly: Let the whole Confederacy crumble in the dust.
Let the world end, but you must not die! I couldn't live if you were
dead!

"I hope you will not repeat what I have said, Scarlett. I do not
want to alarm the others. And, my dear, I would not have alarmed you by
saying these things, were it not that I had to explain why I ask you to
look after Melanie. She's so frail and weak and you're so strong,
Scarlett. It will be a comfort to me to know that you are together if
anything happens to me. You will promise, won't you?"

"Oh, yes!" she cried, for at that moment, seeing death at his elbow,
she would have promised anything. "Ashley, Ashley! I can't let you go
away! I simply can't be brave about it!"

"You must be brave," he said, and his voice changed subtly. It was
resonant, deeper, and his words fell swiftly as though hurried with
some inner urgency. "You must be brave. For how else can I stand
it?"

Her eyes sought his face quickly and with joy, wondering if he meant
that leaving her was breaking his heart, even as it was breaking hers.
His face was as drawn as when he came down from bidding Melanie
good-by, but she could read nothing in his eyes. He leaned down, took
her face in his hands, and kissed her lightly on the forehead.

"Scarlett! Scarlett! You are so fine and strong and good. So
beautiful, not just your sweet face, my dear, but all of you, your body
and your mind and your soul."

"Oh, Ashley," she whispered happily, thrilling at his words and his
touch on her face. "Nobody else but you ever—"

"I like to think that perhaps I know you better than most people and
that I can see beautiful things buried deep in you that others are too
careless and too hurried to notice."

He stopped speaking and his hands dropped from her face, but his
eyes still clung to her eyes. She waited a moment, breathless for him
to continue, a-tiptoe to hear him say the magic three words. But they
did not come. She searched his face frantically, her lips quivering,
for she saw he had finished speaking.

This second blighting of her hopes was more than heart could bear
and she cried "Oh!" in a childish whisper and sat down, tears stinging
her eyes. Then she heard an ominous sound in the driveway, outside the
window, a sound that brought home to her even more sharply the
imminence of Ashley's departure. A pagan hearing the lapping of the
waters around Charon's boat could not have felt more desolate. Uncle
Peter, muffled in a quilt, was bringing out the carriage to take Ashley
to the train.

Ashley said "Good-by," very softly, caught up from the table the
wide felt hat she had inveigled from Rhett and walked into the dark
front hall. His hand on the doorknob, he turned and looked at her, a
long, desperate look, as if he wanted to carry away with him every
detail of her face and figure. Through a blinding mist of tears she saw
his face and with a strangling pain in her throat she knew that he was
going away, away from her care, away from the safe haven of this house,
and out of her life, perhaps forever, without having spoken the words
she so yearned to hear. Time was going by like a

=== SCENE 29 ===
r and prices rose higher and higher, the public outcry against
the speculators grew louder and more venomous. In those early days of
1864, no newspaper could be opened that did not carry scathing
editorials denouncing the speculators as vultures and bloodsucking
leeches and calling upon the government to put them down with a hard
hand. The government did its best, but the efforts came to nothing, for
the government was harried by many things.

Against no one was feeling more bitter than against Rhett Butler. He
had sold his boats when blockading grew too hazardous, and he was now
openly engaged in food speculation. The stories about him that came
back to Atlanta from Richmond and Wilmington made those who had
received him in other days writhe with shame.

In spite of all these trials and tribulations, Atlanta's ten
thousand population had grown to double that number during the war.
Even the blockade had added to Atlanta's prestige. From time
immemorial, the coast cities had dominated the South, commercially and
otherwise. But now with the ports closed and many of the port cities
captured or besieged, the South's salvation depended upon itself. The
interior section was what counted, if the South was going to win the
war, and Atlanta was now the center of things. The people of the town
were suffering hardship, privation, sickness and death as severely as
the rest of the Confederacy; but Atlanta, the city, had gained rather
than lost as a result of the war. Atlanta, the heart of the
Confederacy, was still beating full and strong, the railroads that were
its arteries throbbing with the never-ending flow of men, munitions and
supplies.


In other days, Scarlett would have been bitter about her shabby
dresses and patched shoes but now she did not care, for the one person
who mattered was not there to see her. She was happy those two months,
happier than she had been in years. Had she not felt the start of
Ashley's heart when her arms went round his neck? seen that despairing
look on his face which was more open an avowal than any words could be?
He loved her. She was sure of that now, and this conviction was so
pleasant she could even be kinder

=== SCENE 30 ===
it meant but the eyes of the three women went to
one another, wide with terror, and Scarlett forgot all thoughts of
going home. Without finishing their breakfasts they drove down to
telegraph Ashley's colonel, but even as they entered the office, there
was a telegram from him.

"Regret to inform you Major Wilkes missing since scouting expedition
three days ago. Will keep you informed."

It was a ghastly trip home, with Aunt Pitty crying into her
handkerchief, Melanie sitting erect and white and Scarlett slumped,
stunned in the corner of the carriage. Once in the house, Scarlett
stumbled up the stairs to her bedroom and, clutching her Rosary from
the table, dropped to her knees and tried to pray. But the prayers
would not come. There only fell on her an abysmal fear, a certain
knowledge that God had turned His face from her for her sin. She had
loved a married man and tried to take him from his wife, and God had
punished her by killing him. She wanted to pray but she could not raise
her eyes to Heaven. She wanted to cry but the tears would not come.
They seemed to flood her chest, and they were hot tears that burned
under her bosom, but they would not flow.

Her door opened and Melanie entered. Her face was like a heart cut
from white paper, framed against black hair, and her eyes were wide,
like those of a frightened child lost in the dark.

"Scarlett," she said, putting out her hands. "You must forgive me
for what I said yesterday, for you're—all I've got now. Oh, Scarlett,
I know my darling is dead!"

Somehow, she was in Scarlett's arms, her small breasts heaving with
sobs, and somehow they were lying on the bed, holding each other close,
and Scarlett was crying too, crying with her face pressed close against
Melanie's, the tears of one wetting the cheeks of the other. It hurt so
terribly to cry, but not so much as not being able to cry. Ashley is
dead—dead, she thought, and I have killed him by loving him! Fresh
sobs broke from her, and Melanie somehow feeling comfort in her tears
tightened her arms about her neck.

"At least," she whispered, "at least—I've got his baby."

"And I," thought Scarlett, too stricken now for anything so petty as
jealousy, "I've got nothing—nothing—nothing except the look on his
face when he told me good-by."


The first reports were "Missing—believed killed" and so they
appeared on the casualty list. Melanie telegraphed Colonel Sloan a
dozen times and finally a letter arrived, full of sympathy, explaining
that Ashley and a squad had ridden out on a scouting expedition and had
not returned. There had been reports of a slight skirmish within the
Yankee lines and Mose, frantic with grief, had risked his own life to
search for Ashley's body but had found nothing. Melanie, strangely calm
now, telegraphed him money and instructions to come home.

When "Missing—believed captured" appeared on the casualty lists,
joy and hope reanimated the sad household. Melanie could hardly be
dragged away from the telegraph office and she met every train hoping
for letters. She was sick now, her pregnancy making itself felt in many
unpleasant ways, but she refused to obey Dr. Meade's commands and stay
in bed. A feverish energy possessed her and would not let her be still;
and at night, long after Scarlett had gone to bed, she could hear her
walking the floor in the next room.

One afternoon, she came home from town, driven by the frightened
Uncle Peter and supported by Rhett Butler. She had fainted at the
telegraph office and Rhett, passing by and observing the excitement,
had escorted her home. He carried her up the stairs to her bedroom and
while the alarmed household fled hither and yon for hot bricks,
blankets and whisky, he propped her on the pillows of her bed.

"Mrs. Wilkes," he questioned abruptly, "you are going to have a
baby, are you not?"

Had Melanie not been so faint, so sick, so heartsore, she would have
collapsed at his question. Even with women friends she was embarrassed
by any mention of her condition, while visits to Dr. Meade were
agonizing experiences. And for a man, especially Rhett Butler, to ask
such a question was unthinkable. But lying weak and forlorn in the bed,
she could only nod. After she had nodded, it did not seem so dreadful,
for he looked so kind and so concerned.

"Then you must take better care of yourself. All this running about
and worry won't help you and may harm the baby. If you will permit me,
Mrs. Wilkes, I will use what influence I have in Washington to learn
about Mr. Wilkes' fate. If he is a prisoner, he will be on the Federal
lists, and if he isn't—well, there's nothing worse than uncertainty.
But I must have your promise. Take care of yourself or, before God, I
won't turn a hand."

"Oh, you are so kind," cried Melanie. "How can people say such
dreadful things about you?" Then overcome with the knowledge of her
tactlessness and also with horror at having discussed her condition
with a man, she began to cry weakly. And Scarlett, flying up the stairs
with a hot brick wrapped in flannel, found Rhett patting her hand.

He was as good as his word. They never knew what wires he pulled.
They feared to ask, knowing it might involve an admission of his too
close affiliations with the Yankees. It was a month before he had news,
news that raised them to the heights when they first heard it, but
later created a gnawing anxiety in their hearts.

Ashley was not dead! He had been wounded and taken prisoner, and the
records showed that he was at Rock Island, a prison camp in Illinois.
In their first joy, they could think of nothing except that he was
alive. But, when calmness began to return, they looked at one another
and said "Rock Island!" in the same voice they would have said "In
Hell!" For even as Andersonville was a name that stank in the North, so
was Rock Island one to bring terror to the heart of any Southerner who
had relatives imprisoned there.

When Lincoln refused to exchange prisoners, believing it would
hasten the end of the war to burden the Confederacy with the feeding
and guarding of Union prisoners, there were thousands of bluecoats at
Andersonville, Georgia. The Confederates were on scant rations and
practically without drugs or bandages for their own sick and wounded.
They had little to share with the prisoners. They fed their prisoners
on what the soldiers in the field were eating, fat pork and dried peas,
and on this diet the Yankees died like flies, sometimes a hundred a
day. Inflamed by the reports, the North resorted to harsher treatment
of Confederate prisoners and at no place were conditions worse than at
Rock Island. Food was scanty, one blanket for three men, and the
ravages of smallpox, pneumonia and typhoid gave the place the name of a
pest-house. Three-fourths of all the men sent there never came out
alive.

And Ashley was in that horrible place! Ashley was alive but he was
wounded and at Rock Island, and the snow must have been deep in
Illinois when he was taken there. Had he died of his wound, since Rhett
had learned his news? Had he fallen victim to smallpox? Was he
delirious with pneumonia and no blanket to cover him?

"Oh, Captain Butler, isn't there some way— Can't you use your
influence and have him exchanged?" cried Melanie.

"Mr. Lincoln, the merciful and just, who cries large tears over Mrs.
Bixby's five boys, hasn't any tears to shed about the thousands of
Yankees dying at Andersonville," said Rhett, his mouth twisting. "He
doesn't care if they all die. The order is out. No exchanges. I—I
hadn't told you before, Mrs. Wilkes, but your husband had a chance to
get out and refused it."

"Oh, no!" cried Melanie in disbelief.

"Yes, indeed. The Yankees are recruiting men for frontier service to
fight the Indians, recruiting them from among Confederate prisoners.
Any prisoner who will take the oath of allegiance and enlist for Indian
service for two years will be released and sent West. Mr. Wilkes
refused."

"Oh, how could he?" cried Scarlett. "Why didn't he take the oath and
then desert and come home as soon as he got out of jail?"

Melanie turned on her like a small fury.

"How can you even suggest that he would do such a thing? Betray his
own Confederacy by taking that vile oath and then betray his word to
the Yankees! I would rather know he was dead at Rock Island than hear
he had taken that oath. I'd be proud of him if he died in prison. But
if he did THAT, I would never look on his face again. Never! Of course,
he refused."

When Scarlett was seeing Rhett to the door, she asked indignantly:
"If it were you, wouldn't you enlist with the Yankees to keep from
dying in that place and then desert?"

"Of course," said Rhett, his teeth showing beneath his mustache.

"Then why didn't Ashley do it?"

"He's a gentleman," said Rhett, and Scarlett wondered how it was
possible to convey such cynicism and contempt in that one honorable
word.

PART THREE

CHAPTER XVII

May of 1864 came—a hot dry May that wilted the flowers in the
buds—and the Yankees under General Sherman were in Georgia again,
above Dalton, one hundred miles northwest of Atlanta. Rumor had it that
there would be heavy fighting up there near the boundary between
Georgia and Tennessee. The Yankees were massing for an attack on the
Western and Atlantic Rail

=== SCENE 31 ===
e closer,
she knew that Phil would have to go. He was sixteen now and in the Home
Guard. Fanny Elsing, pale and hollow eyed since Gettysburg, was trying
to keep her mind from the torturing picture which had worn a groove in
her tired mind these past several months—Lieutenant Dallas McLure
dying in a jolting ox cart in the rain on the long, terrible retreat
into Maryland.

Captain Carey Ashburn's useless arm was hurting him again and
moreover he was depressed by the thought that his courtship of Scarlett
was at a standstill. That had been the situation ever since the news of
Ashley Wilkes' capture, though the connection between the two events
did not occur to him. Scarlett and Melanie both were thinking of
Ashley, as they always did when urgent tasks or the necessity of
carrying on a conversation did not divert them. Scarlett was thinking
bitterly, sorrowfully: He must be dead or else we would have heard.
Melanie, stemming the tide of fear again and again, through endless
hours, was telling herself: "He can't be dead. I'd know it—I'd feel it
if he were dead." Rhett Butler lounged in the shadows, his long legs in
their elegant boots crossed negligently, his dark face an unreadable
blank. In his arms Wade slept contentedly, a cleanly picked wishbone in
his small hand. Scarlett always permitted Wade to sit up late when
Rhett called because the shy child was fond of him, and Rhett oddly
enough seemed to be fond of Wade. Generally Scarlett was annoyed by the
child's presence, but he always behaved nicely in Rhett's arms. As for
Aunt Pitty, she was nervously trying to stifle a belch, for the rooster
they had had for supper was a tough old bird.

That morning Aunt Pitty had reached the regretful decision that she
had better kill the patriarch before he died of old age and pining for
his harem which had long since been eaten. For days he had drooped
about the empty chicken run, too dispirited to crow. After Uncle Peter
had wrung his neck, Aunt Pitty had been beset by conscience at the
thought of enjoying him, en famille, when so many of her friends had
not tasted chicken for weeks, so she suggested company for dinner.
Melanie, who was now in her fifth month, had not been out in public or
received guests for weeks, and she was appalled at the idea. But Aunt
Pitty, for once, was firm. It would be selfish to eat the rooster
alone, and if Melanie would only move her top hoop a little higher no
one would notice anything and she was so flat in the bust anyway.

"Oh, but Auntie I don't want to see people when Ashley—"

"It isn't as if Ashley were—had passed away," said Aunt Pitty, her
voice quavering, for in her heart she was certain Ashley was dead.
"He's just as much alive as you are and it will do you good to have
company. And I'm going to ask Fanny Elsing, too. Mrs. Elsing begged me
to try to do something to arouse her and make her see people—"

"Oh, but Auntie, it's cruel to force her when poor Dallas has only
been dead—"

"Now, Melly, I shall cry with vexation if you argue with me. I guess
I'm your auntie and I know what's what. And I want a party."

So Aunt Pitty had her party, and, at the last minute, a guest she
did not expect, or desire, arrived. Just when the smell of roast
rooster was filling the house, Rhett Butler, back from one of his
mysterious trips, knocked at the door, with a large box of bonbons
packed in paper lace under his arm and a mouthful of two-edged
compliments for her. There was nothing to do but invite him to stay,
although Aunt Pitty knew how the doctor and Mrs. Meade felt about him
and how bitter Fanny was against any man not in uniform. Neither the
Meades nor the Elsings would have spoken to him on the street, but in a
friend's home they would, of course, have to be polite to him. Besides,
he was now more firmly than ever under the protection of the fragile
Melanie. After he had intervened for her to get the news about Ashley,
she had announced publicly that her home was open to him as long as he
lived and no matter what other people might say about him.

Aunt Pitty's apprehensions quieted when she saw that Rhett was on
his best behavior. He devoted himself to Fanny with such sympathetic
deference she even smiled at him, and the meal went well. It was a
princely feast. Carey Ashburn had brought a little tea, which he had
found in the tobacco pouch of a captured Yankee en route to
Andersonville, and everyone had a cup, faintly flavored with tobacco.
There was a nibble of the tough old bird for each, an adequate amount
of dressing made of corn meal and seasoned with onions, a bowl of dried
peas, and plenty of rice and gravy, the latter somewhat watery, for
there was no flour with which to thicken it. For dessert, there was a
sweet potato pie followed by Rhett's bonbons, and when Rhett produced
real Havana cigars for the gentlemen to enjoy over their glass of
blackberry wine, everyone agreed it was indeed a Lucullan banquet.

When the gentlemen joined the ladies on the front porch, the talk
turned to war. Talk always turned to war now, all conversations on any
topic led from war or back to war—sometimes sad, often gay, but always
war. War romances, war weddings, deaths in hospitals and on the field,
incidents of camp and battle and march, gallantry, cowardice, humor,
sadness, deprivation and hope. Always, always hope. Hope firm, unshaken
despite the defeats of the summer before.

When Captain Ashburn announced he had applied for and been granted
transfer from Atlanta to the army at Dalton, the ladies kissed his
stiffened arm with their eyes and covered their emotions of pride by
declaring he couldn't go, for then who would beau them about?

Young Carey looked confused and pleased at hearing such statements
from settled matrons and spinsters like Mrs. Meade and Melanie and Aunt
Pitty and Fanny, and tried to hope that Scarlett really meant it.

"Why, he'll be back in no time," said the doctor, throwing an arm
over Carey's shoulder. "There'll be just one brief skirmish and the
Yankees will skedaddle back into Tennessee. And when they get there,
General Forrest will take care of them. You ladies need have no alarm
about the proximity of the Yankees, for General Johnston and his army
stands there in the mountains like an iron rampart. Yes, an iron
rampart," he repeated, relishing his phrase. "Sherman will never pass.
He'll never dislodge Old Joe."

The ladies smiled approvingly, for his lightest utterance was
regarded as incontrovertible truth. After all, men understood these
matters much better than women, and if he said General Johnston was an
iron rampart, he must be one. Only Rhett spoke. He had been silent
since supper and had sat in the twilight listening to the war talk with
a down-twisted mouth, holding the sleeping child against his
shoulder.

"I believe that rumor has it that Sherman has over one hundred
thousand men, now that his reinforcements have come up?"

The doctor answered him shortly. He had been under considerable
strain ever since he first arrived and found that one of his fellow
diners was this man whom he disliked so heartily. Only the respect due
Miss Pittypat and his presence under her roof as a guest had restrained
him from showing his feelings more obviously.

"Well, sir?" the doctor barked in reply.

"I believe Captain Ashburn said just a while ago that General
Johnston had only about forty thousand, counting the deserters who were
encouraged to come back to the colors by the last victory."

"Sir," said Mrs. Meade indignantly. "There are no deserters in the
Confederate army."

"I beg your pardon," said Rhett with mock humility. "I meant those
thousands on furlough who forgot to rejoin their regiments and those
who have been over their wounds for six months but who remain at home,
going about their usual business or doing the spring plowing."

His eyes gleamed and Mrs. Meade bit her lip in a huff. Scarlett
wanted to giggle at her discomfiture, for Rhett had caught her fairly.
There were hundreds of men skulking in the swamps and the mountains,
defying the provost guard to drag them back to the army. They were the
ones who declared it was a "rich man's war and a poor man's fight" and
they had had enough of it. But outnumbering these by far were men who,
though carried on company rolls as deserters, had no intention of
deserting permanently. They were the ones who had waited three years in
vain for furloughs and while they waited received ill-spelled letters
from home: "We air hungry" "There won't be no crop this year—there
ain't nobody to plow." "We air hungry." "The commissary took the
shoats, and we ain't had no money from you in months. We air livin' on
dried peas."

Always the rising chorus swelled: "We are hungry, your wife, your
babies, your parents. When will it be over? When will you come home? We
are hungry, hungry." When furloughs from the rapidly thinning army were
denied, these soldiers went home without them, to plow their land and
plant their crops, repair their houses and build up their fences. When
regimental officers, understanding the situation, saw a hard fight
ahead, they wrote these men, telling them to rejoin their companies and
no questions would be asked. Usually the men returned when they saw
that hunger at home would be held at bay for a few months longer. "Plow
furloughs" were not looked upon in the same light as desertion in the
face of the enemy, but they weakened the army just the same.

Dr. Meade hastily bridged over the uncomfortable pause, his voice
cold: "Captain Butler, the numerical difference between our troops and
those of the Yankees has never mattered. One Confederate is worth a
dozen Yankees."

The ladies nodded. Everyone knew that.

"That was true at the first of the war," said Rhett. "Perhaps it's
still true, provided the Confederate soldier has bullets for his gun
and shoes on his feet and food in his stomach. Eh, Captain
Ashburn?"

His voice was still soft and filled with specious humility. Carey
Ashburn looked unhappy, for it was obvious that he, too, disliked Rhett
intensely. He gladly would have sided with the doctor but he could not
lie. The reason he had applied for transfer to the front, despite his
useless arm, was that he realized, as the civilian population did not,
the seriousness of the situation. There were many other men, stumping
on wooden pegs, blind in one eye, fingers blown away, one arm gone, who
were quietly transferring from the commissariat, hospital duties, mail
and railroad service back to their old fighting units. They knew Old
Joe needed every man.

He did not speak and Dr. Meade thundered, losing his temper: "Our
men have fought without shoes before and without food and won
victories. And they will fight again and win! I tell you General
Johnston cannot be dislodged! The mountain fastnesses have always been
the refuge and the strong forts of invaded peoples from ancient times.
Think of—think of Thermopylae!"

Scarlett thought hard but Thermopylae meant nothing to her.

"They died to the last man at Thermopylae, didn't they, Doctor?"
Rhett asked, and his lips twitched with suppressed laughter.

"Are you being insulting, young man?"

"Doctor! I beg of you! You misunderstood me! I merely asked for
information. My memory of ancient history is poor."

"If need be, our army will die to the last man before they permit
the Yankees to advance farther into Georgia," snapped the doctor. "But
it will not be. They will drive them out of Georgia in one
skirmish."

Aunt Pittypat rose hastily and asked Scarlett to favor them with a
piano selection and a song. She saw that the conversation was rapidly
getting into deep and stormy water. She had known very well there would
be trouble if she invited Rhett to supper. There was always trouble
when he was present. Just how he started it, she never exactly
understood. Dear! Dear! What did Scarlett see in the man? And how could
dear Melly defend him?

As Scarlett went obediently into the parlor, a silence fell on the
porch, a silence that pulsed with resentment toward Rhett. How could
anyone not believe with heart and soul in the invincibility of General
Johnston and his men? Believing was a sacred duty. And those who were
so traitorous as not to believe should, at least, have the decency to
keep their mouths shut.

Scarlett struck a few chords and her voice floated out to them from
the parlor, sweetly, sadly, in the words of a popular song:

"Into a ward of whitewashed walls Where the dead and dying lay—
Wounded with bayonets, shells and balls— Somebody's darling was borne
one day.

"Somebody's darling! so young and so brave! Wearing still on his
pale, sweet face— Soon to be hid by the dust of the grave— The
lingering light of his boyhood's grace."

"Matted and damp are the curls of gold," mourned Scarlett's faulty
soprano, and Fanny half rose and said in a faint, strangled voice:
"Sing something else!"

The piano was suddenly silent as Scarlett was overtaken with
surprise and embarrassment. Then she hastily blundered into the opening
bars of "Jacket of Gray" and stopped with a discord as she remembered
how heartrending that selection was too. The piano was silent again for
she was utterly at a loss. All the songs had to do with death and
parting and sorrow.

Rhett rose swiftly, deposited Wade in Fanny's lap, and went into the
parlor.

"Play 'My Old Kentucky Home,'" he suggested smoothly, and Scarlett
gratefully plunged into it. Her voice was joined by Rhett's excellent
bass, and as they went into the second verse those on the porch
breathed more easily, though Heaven knew it was none too cheery a song,
either.

"Just a few more days for to tote the weary load! No matter, 'twill
never be light! Just a few more days, till we totter in the road! Then,
my old Kentucky home, good night!"


Dr. Meade's prediction was right—as far as it went. Johnston did
stand like an iron rampart in the mountains above Dalton, one hundred
miles away. So firmly did

=== SCENE 32 ===
,
white faces of mangled men waiting for the doctor to get to them, men
whose ears were filled with screams, men waiting for the dreadful
words: "I'm sorry, my boy, but that hand will have to come off. Yes,
yes, I know; but look, see those red streaks? It'll have to come
off."

Chloroform was so scarce now it was used only for the worst
amputations and opium was a precious thing, used only to ease the dying
out of life, not the living out of pain. There was no quinine and no
iodine at all. Yes, Scarlett was sick of it all, and that morning she
wished that she, like Melanie, had the excuse of pregnancy to offer.
That was about the only excuse that was socially acceptable for not
nursing these days.

When noon came, she put off her apron and sneaked away from the
hospital while Mrs. Merriwether was busy writing a letter for a
gangling, illiterate mountaineer. Scarlett felt that she could stand it
no longer. It was an imposition on her and she knew that when the
wounded came in on the noon train there would be enough work to keep
her busy until night-fall—and probably without anything to eat.

She went hastily up the two short blocks to Peachtree Street,
breathing the unfouled air in as deep gulps as her tightly laced corset
would permit. She was standing on the corner, uncertain as to what she
would do next, ashamed to go home to Aunt Pitty's but determined not to
go back to the hospital, when Rhett Butler drove by.

"You look like the ragpicker's child," he observed, his eyes taking
in the mended lavender calico, streaked with perspiration and splotched
here and there with water which had slopped from the basin. Scarlett
was furious with embarrassment and indignation. Why did he always
notice women's clothing and why was he so rude as to remark upon her
present untidiness?

"I don't want to hear a word out of you. You get out and help me in
and drive me somewhere where nobody will se

=== SCENE 33 ===
ling
her billowing skirts and tying her bonnet bow more firmly under her
chin. "And every day more and more wounded come in. It's all General
Johnston's fault. If he'd just stood up to the Yankees at Dalton,
they'd have—"

"But he did stand up to the Yankees, you ignorant child. And if he'd
kept on standing there, Sherman would have flanked him and crushed him
between the two wings of his army. And he'd have lost the railroad and
the railroad is what Johnston is fighting for."

"Oh, well," said Scarlett, on whom military strategy was utterly
lost. "It's his fault anyway. He ought to have done something about it
and I think he ought to be removed. Why doesn't he stand and fight
instead of retreating?"

"You are like everyone else, screaming 'Off with his head' because
he can't do the impossible. He was Jesus the Savior at Dalton, and now
he's Judas the Betrayer at Kennesaw Mountain, all in six weeks. Yet,
just let him drive the Yankees back twenty miles and he'll be Jesus
again. My child, Sherman has twice as many men as Johnston, and he can
afford to lose two men for every one of our gallant laddies. And
Johnston can't afford to lose a single man. He needs reinforcements
badly and what is he getting? 'Joe Brown's Pets.' What a help they'll
be!"

"Is the militia really going to be called out? The Home Guard, too?
I hadn't heard. How do you know?"

"There's a rumor floating about to that effect. The rumor arrived on
the train from Milledgeville this morning. Both the militia and the
Home Guards are going to be sent in to reinforce General Johnston. Yes,
Governor Brown's darlings are likely to smell powder at last, and I
imagine most of them will be much surprised. Certainly they never
expected to see action. The Governor as good as promised them they
wouldn't. Well, that's a good joke on them. They thought they had bomb
proofs because the Governor stood up to even Jeff Davis and refused to
send them to Virginia. Said they were needed for the defense of their
state. Who'd have ever thought the war would come to their own back
yard and they'd really have to defend their state?"

"Oh, how can you laugh, you cruel thing! Think of the old gentlemen
and the little boys in the Home Guard! Why, little Phil Meade will have
to go and Grandpa Merriwether and Uncle Henry Hamilton."

"I'm not talking about the little boys and the Mexican War veterans.
I'm talking about brave young men like Willie Guinan who like to wear
pretty uniforms and wave swords—"

"And yourself!"

"My dear, that didn't hurt a bit! I wear no uniform and wave no
sword and the fortunes of the Confederacy mean nothing at all to me.
Moreover, I wouldn't be caught dead in the Home Guard or in any army,
for that matter. I had enough of things military at West Point to do me
the rest of my life...Well, I wish Old Joe luck. General Lee can't
send him any help because the Yankees are keeping him busy in Virginia.
So the Georgia state troops are the only reinforcements Johnston can
get. He deserves better, for he's a great strategist. He always manages
to get places before the Yankees do. But he'll have to keep falling
back if he wants to protect the railroad; and mark my words, when they
push him out of the mountains and onto the flatter land around here,
he's going to be butchered."

"Around here?" cried Scarlett. "You know mighty well the Yankees
will never get this far!"

"Kennesaw is only twenty-two miles away and I'll wager you—"

"Rhett, look, down the street! That crowd of men! They aren't
soldiers. What on earth...? Why, they're darkies!"

There was a great cloud of red dust coming up the street and from
the cloud came the sound of the tramping of many feet and a hundred or
more negro voices, deep throated, careless, singing a hymn. Rhett
pulled the carriage over to the curb, and Scarlett looked curiously at
the sweating black men, picks and shovels over their shoulders,
shepherded along by an officer and a squad of men wearing the insignia
of the engineering corps.

"What on earth...?" she began again.

Then her eyes lighted on a singing black buck in the front rank. He
stood nearly six and a half feet tall, a giant of a man, ebony black,
stepping along with the lithe grace of a powerful animal, his white
teeth flashing as

=== SCENE 34 ===
hey had.

"What are you boys doing so far from Tara? You've run away, I'll be
bound. Don't you know the patterollers will get you sure?"

They bellowed pleasedly at the badinage.

"Runned away?" answered Big Sam. "No'm, us ain' runned away. Dey
done sont an' tuck us, kase us wuz de fo' bigges' an' stronges' han's
at Tara." His white teeth showed proudly. "Dey specially sont fer me,
kase Ah could sing so good. Yas'm, Mist' Frank Kennedy, he come by an'
tuck us."

"But why, Big Sam?"

"Lawd, Miss Scarlett! Ain' you heerd? Us is ter dig de ditches fer
de wite gempmums ter hide in w'en de Yankees comes."

Captain Randall and the occupants of the carriage smothered smiles
at this naive explanation of rifle pits.

"Cose, Mis' Gerald might' nigh had a fit w'en dey tuck me, an' he
say he kain run de place widout me. But Miss Ellen she say: 'Tek him,
Mist' Kennedy. De Confedrutsy need Big Sam mo' dan us do.' An' she gib
me a dollar an' tell me ter do jes' whut de w'ite gempmums tell me. So
hyah us is."

"What does it all mean, Captain Randall?"

"Oh, it's quite simple. We have to strengthen the fortifications of
Atlanta with more miles of rifle pits, and the General can't spare any
men from the front to do it. So we've been impressing the strongest
bucks in the countryside for the work."

"But—"

A cold little fear was beginning to throb in Scarlett's breast. More
miles of rifle pits! Why should they need more? Within the last year, a
series of huge earth redoubts with battery emplacements had been built
all around Atlanta, one mile from the center of town. These great
earth-works were connected with rifle pits and they ran, mile after
mile, completely encircling the city. More rifle pits!

"But—why should we be fortified any more than we are already
fortified? We won't need what we've got. Surely, the General won't
let—"

"Our present fortifications are only a mile from town," said Captain
Randall shortly. "And that's too close for comfort—or safety. These
new ones are going to be farther away. You see, another retreat may
bring our men into Atlanta."

Immediately he regretted his last remark, as her eyes widened with
fear.

"But, of course there won't be another retreat," he added hastily.
"The lines around Kennesaw Mountain are impregnable. The batteries are
planted all up the mountain sides and they command the roads, and the
Yankees can't possibly get by."

But Scarlett saw him drop his eyes before the lazy, penetrating look
Rhett gave him, and she was frightened. She remembered Rhett's remark:
"When the Yankees push him out of the mountains and onto the flatter
land, he'll be butchered."

"Oh, Captain, do you think—"

"Why, of course not! Don't fret your mind one minute. Old Joe just
believes in taking precautions. That's the only reason we're digging
more entrenchments...But I must be going now. It's been pleasant,
talking to you...Say good-by to your mistress, boys, and let's get
going."

"Good-by, boys. Now, if you get sick or hurt or in trouble, let me
know. I live right down Peachtree Street, down there in almost the last
house at the end of town. Wait a minute—" She fumbled in her reticule.
"Oh, dear, I haven't a cent. Rhett, give me a few shinplasters. Here,
Big Sam, buy some tobacco for yourself and the boys. And be good and do
what Captain Randall tells you."

The straggling line re-formed, the dust arose again in a red cloud
as they moved off and Big Sam started up the singing again.

"Go do-ow, Mos-es! Waaa-ay, do-own, in Eeejup laa-an! An' te-el O-le
Faa-ro-o Ter let mah—peee-pul go!"

"Rhett, Captain Randall was lying to me, just like all the men do—
trying to keep the truth from us women for fear we'll faint. Or was he
lying? Oh, Rhett, if there's no danger, why are they digging these new
breastworks? Is the army so short of men they've got to use
darkies?"

Rhett clucked to the mare.

"The army is damned short of men. Why else would the Home Guard be
called out? And as for the entrenchments, well, fortifications are
supposed to be of some value in case of a siege. The General is
preparing to make his final stand here."

"A siege! Oh, turn the horse around. I'm going home, back home to
Tara, right away."

"What ails you?"

"A siege! Name of God, a siege! I've heard about sieges! Pa was in
one or maybe it was his Pa, and Pa told me—"

"What siege?"

=== SCENE 35 ===
: "I don't see
why you've stayed here this long! All you think about is being
comfortable and eating and—and things like that."

"I know no more pleasant way to pass the time than in eating and
er—things like that," he said. "And as for why I stay here—well, I've
read a good deal about sieges, beleaguered cities and the like, but
I've never seen one. So I think I'll stay here and watch. I won't get
hurt because I'm a noncombatant and besides I want the experience.
Never pass up new experiences, Scarlett. They enrich the mind."

"My mind's rich enough."

"Perhaps you know best about that, but I should say— But that would
be ungallant. And perhaps, I'm staying here to rescue you when the
siege does come. I've never rescued a maiden in distress. That would be
a new experience, too."

She knew he was teasing her but she sensed a seriousness behind his
words. She tossed her head.

"I won't need you to rescue me. I can take care of myself, thank
you."

"Don't say that, Scarlett! Think of it, if you like, but never,
never say it to a man. That's the trouble with Yankee girls. They'd be
most charming if they weren't always telling you that they can take
care of themselves, thank you. Generally they are telling the truth,
God help them. And so men let them take care of themselves."

"How you do run on," she said coldly, for there was no insult worse
than being likened to a Yankee girl. "I believe you're lying about a
siege. You know the Yankees will never get to Atlanta."

"I'll bet you they will be here within the month. I'll bet you a box
of bonbons against—" His dark eyes wandered to her lips. "Against a
kiss."

For a last brief moment, fear of a Yankee invasion clutched her
heart but at the word "kiss," she forgot about it. This was familiar
ground and far more interesting than military operations. With
difficulty she restrained a smile of glee. Since the day when he gave
her the green bonnet, Rhett had made no advances which could in any way
be construed as those of a lover. He could never be inveigled into
personal conversations, try though she might, but now with no angling
on her part, he was talking about kissing.

"I don't care for such personal conversation," she said coolly and
managed a frown. "Besides, I'd just as soon kiss a pig."

"There's no accounting for tastes and I've always heard the Irish
were partial to pigs—kept them under their beds, in fact. But,
Scarlett, you n

=== SCENE 36 ===
h, yes, if I cared to take the trouble," he said carelessly. "They
say I kiss very well."

"Oh," she began, indignant at the slight to her charms. "Why, you..."
But her eyes fell in sudden confusion. He was smiling, but in the
dark depths of his eyes a tiny light flickered for a brief moment, like
a small raw flame.

"Of course, you've probably wondered why I never tried to follow up
that chaste peck I gave you, the day I brought you that bonnet—"

"I have never—"

"Then you aren't a nice girl, Scarlett, and I'm sorry to hear it.
All really nice girls wonder when men don't try to kiss them. They know
they shouldn't want them to and they know they must act insulted if
they do, but just the same, they wish the men would try...Well, my
dear, take heart. Some day, I will kiss you and you will like it. But
not now, so I beg you not to be too impatient."

She knew he was teasing but, as always, his teasing maddened her.
There was always too much truth in the things he said. Well, this
finished him. If ever, ever he should be so ill bred as to try to take
any liberties with her, she would show him.

"Will you kindly turn the horse around, Captain Butler? I wish to go
back to the hospital."

"Do you indeed, my ministering angel? Then lice and slops are
preferable to my conversation? Well, far be it from me to keep a pair
of willing hands from laboring for Our Glorious Cause." He turned the
horse's head and they started back toward Five Points.

"As to why I have made no further advances," he pursued blandly, as
though she had not signified that the conversation was at an end, "I'm
waiting for you to grow up a little more. You see, it wouldn't be much
fun for me to kiss you now and I'm quite selfish about my pleasures. I
never fancied kissing children."

He smothered a grin, as from the corner of his eye he saw her bosom
heave with silent wrath.

"And then, too," he continued softly, "I was waiting for the memory
of the estimable Ashley Wilkes to fade."

At the mention of Ashley's name, sudden pain went through her,
sudden hot tears stung her lids. Fade? The memory of Ashley would never
fade, not if he were dead a thousand years. She thought of Ashley
wounded, dying in a far-off Yankee prison, with no blankets over him,
with no one who loved him to hold his hand, and she was filled with
hate for the well-fed man who sat beside her, jeers just beneath the
surface of his drawling voice.

She was too angry to speak and they rode along in silence for some
while.

"I understand practically everything about you and Ashley, now,"
Rhett resumed. "I began with your inelegant scene at Twelve Oaks and,
since then, I've picked up many things by keeping my eyes open. What
things? Oh, that you still cherish a romantic schoolgirl passion for
him which he reciprocates as well as his honorable nature will permit
him. And that Mrs. Wilkes knows nothing and that, between the two of
you, you've done her a pretty trick. I understand practically
everything, except one thing that piques my curiosity. Did the
honorable Ashley ever jeopar

=== SCENE 37 ===
o your
heart. But I'm sure you'll get over it and when you've forgotten his
kiss, I'll—"

She turned in fury.

"You go to—Halifax," she said tensely, her green eyes slits of
rage. "And let me out of this carriage before I jump over the wheels.
And I don't ever want to speak to you again."

He stopped the carriage, but before he could alight and assist her
she sprang down. Her hoop caught on the wheel and for a moment the
crowd at Five Points had a flashing view of petticoats and pantalets.
Then Rhett leaned over and swiftly released it. She flounced off
without a word, without even a backward look, and he laughed softly and
clicked to the horse.

CHAPTER XVIII

For the first time since the war began, Atlanta could hear the sound
of battle. In the early morning hours before the noises of the town
awoke, the cannon at Kennesaw Mountain could be heard faintly, far
away, a low dim booming that might have passed for summer thunder.
Occasionally it was loud enough to be heard even above the rattle of
traffic at noon. People tried not to listen to it, tried to talk, to
laugh, to carry on their business, just as though the Yankees were not
there, twenty-two miles away, but always ears were strained for the
sound. The town wore a preoccupied look, for no matter what occupied
their hands, all were listening, listening, their hearts leaping
suddenly a hundred times a day. Was the booming louder? Or did they
only think it was louder? Would General Johnston hold them this time?
Would he?

Panic lay just beneath the surface. Nerves which had been stretched
tighter and tighter each day of the retreat began to reach the breaking
point. No one spoke of fears. That subject was taboo, but strained
nerves found expression in loud criticism of the General. Public
feeling was at fever heat. Sherman was at the very doors of Atlanta.
Another retreat might bring the Confederates into the town.

Give us a general who won't retreat! Give us a man who will stand
and fight!

With the far-off rumbling of cannon in their ears, the state
militia, "Joe Brown's Pets," and the Home Guard marched out of Atlanta,
to defend the bridges and ferries of the Chattahoochee River at
Johnston's back. It was a gray, overcast day and, as they marched
through Five Points and out the Marietta road, a fine rain began to
fall. The whole town had turned out to see them off and they stood,
close packed, under the wooden awnings of the stores on Peachtree
Street and tried to cheer.

Scarlett and Maybelle Merriwether Picard had been given permission
to leave the hospital and watch the men go out, because Uncle Henry
Hamilton and Grandpa Merriwether were in the Home Guard, and they stood
with Mrs. Meade, pressed in the crowd, tiptoeing to get a better view.
Scarlett, though filled with the universal Southern desire to believe
only the pleasantest and most reassuring things about the progress of
the fighting, felt cold as she watched the motley ranks go by. Surely,
things must

=== SCENE 38 ===
e fence, he
stopped dead and over his head went your father! It's a wonder it
didn't break his neck! You know how obstinate he is. He got right up
and tried it again. Well, Scarlett, he came off three times before Mrs.
O'Hara and Pork assisted him to bed. He was in a taking about it,
swearing that your mother had 'spoken a wee word in the beast's ear.'
He just isn't up to active service, Scarlett. You need have no shame
about it. After all, someone must stay home and raise crops for the
army."

Scarlett had no shame at all, only an active feeling of relief.

"I've sent India and Honey to Macon to stay with the Burrs and Mr.
O'Hara is looking after Twelve Oaks as well as Tara...I must go,
my dear. Let me kiss your pretty face."

Scarlett turned up her lips and there was a choking pain in her
throat. She was so fond of Mr. Wilkes. Once, long ago, she had hoped to
be his daughter-in-law.

"And you must deliver this kiss to Pittypat and this to Melanie," he
said, kissing her lightly two more times. "And how is Melanie?"

"She is well."

"Ah!" His eyes looked at her but through her, past her as Ashley's
had done, remote gray eyes looking on another world. "I should have
liked to see my first grandchild. Good-by, my dear."

He swung onto Nellie and cantered off, his hat in his hand, his
silver hair bare to the rain. Scarlett had rejoined Maybelle and Mrs.
Meade before the import of his last words broke upon her. Then in
superstitious terror she crossed herself and tried to say a prayer. He
had spoken of death, just as Ashley had done, and now Ashley— No one
should ever speak of death! It was tempting Providence to mention
death. As the three women started silently back to the hospital in the
rain, Scarlett was praying: "Not him, too, God. Not him and Ashley,
too!"

The retreat from Dalton to Kennesaw Mountain had taken from early
May to mid-June and as the hot rainy days of June passed and Sherman
failed to dislodge the Confederates from the steep slippery slopes,
hope again raised its head. Everyone grew more cheerful and spoke more
kindly of General Johnston. As wet June days passed into a wetter July
and the Confederates, fighting desperately around the entrenched
heights, still held Sherman at bay, a wild gaiety took hold of Atlanta.
Hope went to their heads like champagne. Hurrah! Hurrah! We're holding
them! An epidemic of parties and dances broke out. Whenever groups of
men from the fighting were in town for the night, dinners were given
for them and afterwards there was dancing and the girls, outnumbering
the men ten to one, made much of them and fought to dance with
them.

Atlanta was crowded with visitors, refugees, families of wounded men
in the hospitals, wives and mothers of soldiers fighting at the
mountain who wished to be near them in case of wounds. In addition,
bevies of belles from the country districts, where all remaining men
were under sixteen or over sixty, descended upon the town. Aunt Pitty
disapproved highly of these last, for she felt they had come to Atlanta
for no reason at all except to catch husbands, and the shamelessness of
it made her wonder what the world was coming to. Scarlett disapproved,
too. She did not care for the eager competition furnished by the
sixteen-year-olds whose fresh cheeks and bright smiles made one forget
their twice-turned frocks and patched shoes. Her own clothes were
prettier and newer than most, thanks to the material Rhett Butler had
brought her on the last boat he ran in, but, after all, she was
nineteen and getting along and men had a way of chasing silly young
things.

A widow with a child was at a disadvantage with these pretty minxes,
she thought. But in these exciting days her widowhood and her
motherhood weighed less heavily upon her than ever before. Between
hospital duties in the day time and parties at night, she hardly ever
saw Wade. Sometimes she actually forgot, for long stretches, that she
had

=== SCENE 39 ===
ster as to how the
Yankees had been driven from the railroad that one would have thought
he personally had accomplished the feat, single handed. He wrote for
three pages about the gallantry of the troops and then, at the end of
his letter, mentioned briefly that Carreen was ill. The typhoid, Mrs.
O'Hara said it was. She was not very ill and Scarlett was not to worry
about her, but on no condition must she come home now, even if the
railroad should become safe. Mrs. O'Hara was very glad now that
Scarlett and Wade had not come home when the siege began. Mrs. O'Hara
said Scarlett must go to church and say some Rosaries for Carreen's
recovery.

Scarlett's conscience smote her at this last, for it had been months
since she had been to church. Once she would have thought this omission
a mortal sin but, somehow, staying away from church did not seem so
sinful now as it formerly had. But she obeyed her mother and going to
her room gabbled a hasty Rosary. When she rose from her knees she did
not feel as comforted as she had formerly felt after prayer. For some
time she had felt that God was not watching out for her, the
Confederates or the South, in spite of the millions of prayers
ascending to Him daily.

That night she sat on the front porch with Gerald's letter in her
bosom where she could touch it occasionally and bring Tara and Ellen
closer to her. The lamp in the parlor window threw odd golden shadows
onto the dark vine-shrouded porch, and the matted tangle of yellow
climbing roses and honeysuckle made a wall of mingled fragrance about
her. The night was utterly still. Not even the crack of a rifle had
sounded since sunset and the world seemed far away. Scarlett rocked
back and forth, lonely, miserable since reading the news from Tara,
wishing that someone, anyone, even Mrs. Merriwether, were with her. But
Mrs. Merriwether was on night duty at the hospital, Mrs. Meade was at
home making a feast for Phil, who was in from the front lines, and
Melanie was asleep. There was not even the hope of a chance caller.
Visitors had fallen off to nothing this last week, for every man who
could walk was in the rifle pits or chasing the Yankees about the
countryside near Jonesboro.

It was not often that she was alone like this and she did not like
it. When she was alone she had to think and, these days, thoughts were
not so pleasant. Like everyone else, she had fallen into the habit of
thinking of the past, the dead.

Tonight when Atlanta was so quiet, she could close her eyes and
imagine she was back in the rural stillness of Tara and that life was
unchanged, unchanging. But she knew that life in the County would never
be the same again. She thought of the four Tarletons, the red-haired
twins and Tom and Boyd, and a passionate sadness caught at her throat.
Why, either Stu or Brent might have been her husband. But now, when the
war was over and she went back to Tara to live, she would never again
hear their wild halloos as they dashed up the avenue of cedars. And
Raiford Calvert, who danced so divinely, would never again choose her
to be his partner. And the Munroe boys and little Joe Fontaine
and—

"Oh, Ashley!" she sobbed, dropping her head into her hands. "I'll
never get used to you being gone!"

She heard the front gate click and she hastily raised her head and
dashed her hand across her wet eyes. She rose and saw it was Rhett
Butler coming up the walk, carrying his wide Panama hat in his hand.
She had not seen him since the day when she had alighted from his
carriage so precipitously at Five Points. On that occasion, she had
expressed the desire never to lay eyes on him again. But she was so
glad now to have someone to talk to, someone to divert her thoughts
from Ashley, that she hastily put the memory from her mind. Evidently
he had forgotten the contretemps, or pretended to have forgotten it,
for he settled himself on the top step at her feet without mention of
their late difference.

"So you didn't refugee to Macon! I heard that Miss Pitty had
retreated and, of course, I thought you had gone too. So, when I saw
your light I came here to investigate. Why did you stay?"

"To keep Melanie company. You see, she—well, she can't refugee just
now."

"Thunderation," he said, and in the lamplight she saw that he was
frowning. "You don't mean to tell me Mrs. Wilkes is still here? I never
heard of such idiocy. It's quite dangerous for her in her
condition."

Scarlett was silent, embarrassed, for Melanie's condition was not a
subject she could discuss with a man. She was embarrassed, too, that
Rhett should know it was dangerous for Melanie. Such knowledge sat ill
upon a bachelor.

"It's quite ungallant of you not to think that I might get hurt
too," she said tartly.

His eyes flickered with amusement.

"I'd back you against the Yankees any day."

"I'm not sure that that's a compliment," she said uncertainly.

"It isn't," he answered. "When will you stop looking for compliments
in men's lightest utterances?"

"When I'm on my deathbed," she replied and smiled, thinking that
there would always be men to compliment her, even if Rhett never
did.

"Vanity, vanity," he said. "At least, you are frank about it."

He opened his cigar case, extracted a black cigar and held it to his
nose for a moment. A match flared, he leaned back against a post and,
clasping his hands about his knees, smoked a while in silence. Scarlett
resumed her rocking and the still darkness of the warm night closed
about them. The mockingbird, which nested in the tangle of roses and
honeysuckle, roused from slumber and gave one timid, liquid note. Then,
as if thinking better of the matter, it was silent again.

From the shadow of the porch, Rhett suddenly laughed, a low, soft
laugh.

"So you stayed with Mrs. Wilkes! This is the strangest situation I
ever encountered!"

"I see nothing strange about it," she answered uncomfortably,
immediately on the alert.

"No? But then you lack the impersonal viewpoint. My impression has
been for some time past that you could hardly endure Mrs. Wilkes. You
think her silly and stupid and her patriotic notions bore you. You
seldom pass by the opportunity to slip in some belittling remark about
her, so naturally it seems strange to me that you should elect to do
the unselfish thing and stay here with her during this shelling. Now,
just why did you do it?"

"Because she's Charlie's sister—and like a sister to me," answered
Scarlett with as much dignity as possible though her cheeks were
growing hot.

"You mean because she's Ashley's Wilkes' widow."

Scarlett rose quickly, struggling with her anger.

"I was almost on the point of forgiving you for your former boorish
conduct but now I shan't do it. I wouldn't have ever let you come upon
this porch at all, if I hadn't been feeling so blue and—"

"Sit down and smooth your ruffled fur," he said, and his voice
changed. He reached up and taking her hand pulled her back into her
chair. "Why are you blue?"

"Oh, I had a letter from Tara today. The Yankees are close to home
and my little sister is ill with typhoid and—and—so now, even if I
could go home, like I want to, Mother wouldn't let me for fear I'd
catch it too. Oh, dear, and I do so want to go home!"

"Well, don't cry about it," he said, but his voice was kinder. "You
are much safer here in Atlanta even if the Yankees do come than you'd
be at Tara. The Yankees won't hurt you and typhoid would."

"The Yankees wouldn't hurt me! How can you say such a lie?"

"My dear girl, the Yankees aren't fiends. They haven't horns and
hoofs, as you seem to think. They are pretty much like
Southerners—except with worse manners, of course, and terrible
accents."

"Why, the Yankees would—"

"Rape you? I think not. Though, of course, they'd want to."

"If you are going to talk vilely I shall go into the house," she
cried, grateful that the shadows hid her crimson face.

"Be frank. Wasn't that what you were thinking?"

"Oh, certainly not!"

"Oh, but it was! No use getting mad at me for reading your thoughts.
That's what all our delicately nurtured and pure-minded Southern ladies
think. They have it on their minds constantly. I'll wager even dowagers
like Mrs. Merriwether..."

Scarlett gulped in silence, remembering that wherever two or more
matrons were gathered together, in these trying days, they whispered of
such happenings, always in Virginia or Tennessee or Lousiana, never
close to home. The Yankees raped women and ran bayonets through
children's stomachs and burned houses over the heads of old people.
Everyone knew these things were true even if they didn't shout them on
the street corners. And if Rhett had any decency he would realize they
were true. And not talk about them. And it wasn't any laughing matter
either.

She could hear him chuckling softly. Sometimes he was odious. In
fact, most of the time he was odious. It was awful for a man to know
what women really thought about and talked about. It made a girl feel
positively undressed. And no man ever learned such things from good
women either. She was indignant that he had read her mind. She liked to
believe herself a thing of mystery to men, but she knew Rhett thought
her as transparent as glass.

"Speaking of such matters," he continued, "have you a protector or
chaperon in the house? The admirable Mrs. Merriwether or Mrs. Meade?
They always look at me as if they knew I was here for no good
purpose."

"Mrs. Meade usually comes over at night," answered Scarlett, glad to
change the subject. "But she couldn't tonight. Phil, her boy, is
home."

"What luck," he said softly, "to find you alone."

Something in his voice made her heart beat pleasantly faster and she
felt her face flush. She had heard that note in men's voices often
enough to know that it presaged a declaration of love. Oh, what fun! If
he would just say he loved her, how she would torment him and get even
with him for all the sarcastic remarks he had flung at her these past
three years. She would lead him a chase that would make up for even
that awful humiliation of the day he witnessed her slapping Ashley. And
then she'd tell him sweetly she could only be a sister to him and
retire with the full honors of war. She laughed nervously in pleasant
anticipation.

"Don't giggle," he said, and taking her hand, he turned it over and
pressed his lips into the palm. Something vital, electric, leaped from
him to her at the touch of his warm mouth, something that caressed her
whole body thrillingly. His lips traveled to her wrist and she knew he
must feel the leap of her pulse as her heart quickened and she tried to
draw back her hand. She had not bargained on this—this treacherous
warm tide of feeling that made her want to run her hands through his
hair, to feel his lips upon her mouth.

She wasn't in love with him, she told herself confusedly. She was in
love with Ashley. But how to explain this feeling that made her hands
shake and the pit of her stomach grow cold?

He laughed softly.

"Don't pull away! I won't hurt you!"

"Hurt me? I'm not afraid of you, Rhett Butler, or of any man in shoe
leather!" she cried, furious that her voice shook as well as her
hands.

"An admirable sentiment, but do lower your voice. Mrs. Wilkes might
hear you. And pray compose yourself." He sounded as though delighted at
her flurry.

"Scarlett, you do like me, don't you?"

That was more like what she was expecting.

"Well, sometimes," she answered cautiously. "When you aren't acting
like a varmint."

He laughed again and held the palm of her hand against his hard
chee

=== SCENE 40 ===
e on the front porch with her skirts up and
her drawers showing, but she did not care. She did not care about
anything. Time had stood still. It might be just after twilight and it
might be midnight. She didn't know or care.

She heard sounds of moving feet upstairs and thought "May the Lord
damn Prissy," before her eyes closed and something like sleep descended
upon her. Then after an indeterminate dark interval, Prissy was beside
her, chattering on in a pleased way.

"We done right good, Miss Scarlett. Ah specs Maw couldn' a did no
better."

From the shadows, Scarlett glared at her, too tired to rail, too
tired to upbraid, too tired to enumerate Prissy's offenses—her
boastful assumption of experience she didn't possess, her fright, her
blundering awkwardness, her utter inefficiency when the emergency was
hot, the misplacing of the scissors, the spilling of the basin of water
on the bed, the dropping of the new born baby. And now she bragged
about how good she had been.

And the Yankees wanted to free the negroes! Well, the Yankees were
welcome to them.

She lay back against the pillar in silence and Prissy, aware of her
mood, tiptoed away into the darkness of the porch. After a long
interval in which her breathing finally quieted and her mind steadied,
Scarlett heard the sound of faint voices from up the road, the tramping
of many feet coming from the north. Soldiers! She sat up slowly,
pulling down her skirts, although she knew no one could see her in the
darkness. As they came abreast the house, an indeterminate number,
passing like shadows, she called to them.

"Oh, please!"

A shadow disengaged itself from the mass and came to the gate.

"Are you going? Are you leaving us?"

The shadow seemed to take off a hat and a quiet voice came from the
darkness.

"Yes, Ma'm. That's what we're doing. We're the last of the men from
the breastworks, 'bout a mile north from here."

"Are you—is the army really retreating?"

"Yes, Ma'm. You see, the Yankees are coming."

The Yankees are coming! She had forgotten that. Her throat suddenly
contracted and she could say nothing more. The shadow moved away,
merged itself with the other shadows and the feet tramped off into the
darkness. "The Yankees are coming! The Yankees are coming!" That was
what the rhythm of their feet said, that was what her suddenly bumping
heart thudded out with each beat. The Yankees are coming!

"De Yankees is comin'!" bawled Prissy, shrinking close to her. "Oh,
Miss Scarlett, dey'll kill us all! Dey'll run dey baynits in our
stummicks! Dey'll—"

"Oh, hush!" It was terrifying enough to think these things without
hearing them put into trembling words. Renewed fear swept her. What
could she do? How could she escape? Where could she turn for help?
Every friend had failed her.

Suddenly she thought of Rhett Butler and calm dispelled her fears.
Why hadn't she thought of him this morning when she had been tearing
about like a chicken with its head off? She hated him, but he was
strong and smart and he wasn't afraid of the Yankees. And he was still
in town. Of course, she was mad at him. But she could overlook such
things at a time like this. And he had a horse and carriage, too. Oh,
why hadn't she thought of him before! He could take them all away from
this doomed place, away from the Yankees,

=== SCENE 41 ===
unnin' roun' in de
dahk by mahseff! Spose de Yankees gits me?"

"If you run fast you can catch up with those soldiers and they won't
let the Yankees get you. Hurry!"

"Ah's sceered! Sposin' Cap'n Butler ain' at de hotel?"

"Then ask where he is. Haven't you any gumption? If he isn't at the
hotel, go to the barrooms on Decatur Street and ask for him. Go to
Belle Watling's house. Hunt for him. You fool, don't you see that if
you don't hurry and find him the Yankees will surely get us all?"

"Miss Scarlett, Maw would weah me out wid a cotton stalk, did Ah go
in a bahroom or a ho' house."

Scarlett pulled herself to her feet.

"Well, I'll wear you out if you don't. You can stand outside in the
street and yell for him, can't you? Or ask somebody if he's inside. Get
going."

When Prissy still lingered, shuffling her feet and mouthing,
Scarlett gave her another push which nearly sent her headlong down the
front steps.

"You'll go or I'll sell you down the river. You'll never see your
mother again or anybody you know and I'll sell you for a field hand
too. Hurry!"

"Gawdlmighty, Miss Scarlett—"

But under the determined pressure of her mistress' hand she started
down the steps. The front gate clicked and Scarlett cried: "Run, you
goose!"

She heard the patter of Prissy's feet as she broke into a trot, and
then the sound died away on the soft earth.

CHAPTER XXIII

After Prissy had gone, Scarlett went wearily into the downstairs
hall and lit a lamp. The house felt steamingly hot, as though it held
in its walls all the heat of the noontide. Some of her dullness was
passing now and her stomach was clamoring for food. She remembered she
had had nothing to eat since the night before except a spoonful of
hominy, and picking up the lamp she went into the kitchen. The fire in
the oven had died but the room was stifling hot. She found half a pone
of hard corn bread in the skillet and gnawed hungrily on it while she
looked about for other food. There was some hominy left in the pot and
she ate it with a big cooking spoon, not waiting to put it on a plate.
It needed salt badly but she was too hungry to hunt for it. After four
spoonfuls of it, the heat of the room was too much and, taking the lamp
in one hand and a fragment of pone in the other, she went out into the
hall.

She knew she should go upstairs and sit beside Melanie. If anything
went wrong, Melanie would be too weak to call. But the idea of
returning to that room where she had spent so many nightmare hours was
repulsive to her. Even if Melanie were dying, she couldn't go back up
there. She never wanted to see that room again. She set the lamp on the
candle stand by the window and returned to the front porch. It was so
much cooler here, and even the night was drowned in soft warmth. She
sat down on the steps in the circle of faint light thrown by the lamp
and continued gnawing on the corn bread.

When she had finished it, a measure of strength came back to her and
with the strength came again the pricking of fear. She could hear a
humming of noise far down the street, but what it portended she did not
know. She could distinguish nothing but a volume of sound that rose and
fell. She strained forward trying to hear and soon she found her
muscles aching from the tension. More than anything in the world she
yearned to hear the sound of hooves and to see Rhett's careless,
self-confident eyes laughing at her fears. Rhett would take them away,
somewhere. She didn't know where. She didn't care.

As she sat straining her ears toward town, a faint glow appeared
above the trees. It puzzled her. She watched it and saw it grow
brighter. The dark sky became pink and then dull red, and suddenly
above the trees, she saw a huge tongue of flame leap high to the
heavens. She jumped to her feet, her heart beginning again its
sickening thudding and bumping.

The Yankees had come! She knew they had come and they were burn

=== SCENE 42 ===
eins as
swiftly as the flames she saw. She was a child and mad with fright and
she wanted to bury her head in her mother's lap and shut out this
sight. If she were only home! Home with Mother.

Through the nerve-shivering sounds, she heard another sound, that of
fear-sped feet coming up the stairs three at a time, heard a voice
yelping like a lost hound. Prissy broke into the room and, flying to
Scarlett, clutched her arm in a grip that seemed to pinch out pieces of
flesh.

"The Yankees—" cried Scarlett.

"No'm, its our gempmums!" yelled Prissy between breaths, digging her
nails deeper into Scarlett's arm. "Dey's buhnin' de foun'ry an' de ahmy
supply depots an' de wa'houses an', fo' Gawd, Miss Scarlett, dey done
set off dem sebenty freight cahs of cannon balls an' gunpowder an',
Jesus, we's all gwine ter buhn up!"

She began yelping again shrilly and pinched Scarlett so hard she
cried out in pain and fury and shook off her hand.

The Yankees hadn't come yet! There was still time to get away! She
rallied her frightened forces together.

"If I don't get a hold on myself," she thought, "I'll be squalling
like a scalded cat!" and the sight of Prissy's abject terror helped
steady her. She took her by the shoulders and shook her.

"Shut up that racket and talk sense. The Yankees haven't come, you
fool! Did you see Captain Butler? What did he say? Is he coming?"

Prissy ceased her yelling but her teeth chattered.

"Yas'm, ah finely foun' him. In a bahroom, lak you told me.
He—"

"Never mind where you found him. Is he coming? Did you tell him to
bring his horse?"

"Lawd, Miss Scarlett, he say our gempmums done tuck his hawse an'
cah'ige fer a amberlance."

"Dear God in Heaven!"

"But he comin'—"

"What did he say?"

Prissy had recovered her breath and a small measure of control but
her eyes still rolled.

"Well'm, lak you tole me, Ah foun' him in a bahroom. Ah stood
outside an' yell fer him an' he come out. An' terreckly he see me an'
Ah starts tell him, de sojers tech off a sto' house down Decatur Street
an' it flame up an' he say Come on an' he grab me an' we runs ter Fibe
Points an' he say den: What now? Talk fas'. An' Ah say you say, Cap'n
Butler, come quick an' bring yo' hawse an' cah'ige. Miss Melly done had
a chile an' you is bustin' ter get outer town. An' he say: Where all
she studyin' 'bout goin'? An' Ah say: Ah doan know, suh, but you is
boun' ter go fo' de Yankees gits hyah an' wants him ter go wid you. An'
he laugh an' say dey done tuck his hawse."

Scarlett's heart went leaden as the last hope left her. Fool that
she was, why hadn't she thought that the retreating army would
naturally take every vehicle and animal left in the city? For a moment
she was too stunned to hear what Prissy was saying but she pulled
herself together to hear the rest of the story.

"An' den he say, Tell Miss Scarlett ter res' easy. Ah'll steal her a
hawse outer de ahmy crall effen dey's ary one lef. An' he say, Ah done
stole hawses befo' dis night. Tell her Ah git her a hawse effen Ah gits
shot fer it. Den he laugh agin an' say, Cut an' run home. An' befo' Ah
gits started Ker-bboom! Off goes a noise an' Ah lak ter drap in mah
tracks an' he tell me twain't nuthin' but de ammernition our gempmums
blown' up so's de Yankees don't git it an'—"

"He is coming? He's going to bring a horse?"

"So he say."

She drew a long breath of relief. If there was any way of getting a
horse, Rhett Butler would get one. A smart man, Rhett. She would
forgive him anything if he got them out of this mess. Escape! And with
Rhett she would have no fear. Rhett would protect them. Thank God for
Rhett! With safety in view she turned practical.

"Wake Wade up and dress him and pack some clothes for all of us. Put
them in the small trunk. And don't tell Miss Mellie we're going. Not
yet. But wrap the baby in a couple of thick towels and be sure and pack
his clothes."

Prissy still clung to her skirts and hardly anything showed in her
eyes except the whites. Scarlett gave her a shove and loosened her
grip.

"Hurry," she cried, and Prissy went off like a rabbit.

Scarlett knew she should go in and quiet Melanie's fear, knew
Melanie must be frightened out of her senses by the thunderous noises
that continued unabated and the glare that lighted the sky. It looked
and sounded like the end of the world.

But she could not bring herself to go back into that room just yet.
She ran down the stairs with some idea of packing up Miss Pittypat's
china and the little silver she had left when she refugeed to Macon.
But when she reached the dining room, her hands were shaking so badly
she dropped three plates and shattered them. She ran out onto the porch
to listen and back again to the dining room and dropped the silver
clattering to the floor. Everything she touched she dropped. In her
hurry she slipped on the rag rug and fell to the floor with a jolt but
leaped up so quickly she was not even aware of the pain. Upstairs she
could hear Prissy galloping about like a wild animal and the sound
maddened her, for she was galloping just as aimlessly.

For the dozenth time, she ran out onto the porch but this time she
did not go back to her futile packing. She sat down. It was just
impossible to pack anything. Impossible to do anything but sit with
hammering heart and wait for Rhett. It seemed hours before he came. At
last, far up the road, she heard the protesting screech of unoiled
axles and the slow uncertain plodding of hooves. Why didn't he hurry?
Why didn't he make the horse trot?

The sounds came nearer and she leaped to her feet and called Rhett's
name. Then, she saw him dimly as he climbed down from the seat of a
small wagon, heard the clicking of the gate as he came toward her. He
came into view and the light of the lamp showed him plainly. His dress
was as debonaire as if he were going to a ball, well-tailored white
linen coat and trousers, embroidered gray watered-silk waistcoat and a
hint of ruffle on his shirt bosom. His wide Panama hat was set
dashingly on one side of his head and in the belt of his trousers were
thrust two ivory-handled, long- barreled dueling pistols. The pockets
of his coat sagged heavily with ammunition.

He came up the walk with the springy stride of a savage and his fine
head was carried like a pagan prince. The dangers of the night which
had driven Scarlett into panic had affected him like an intoxicant.
There was a carefully restrained ferocity in his dark face, a
ruthlessness which would have frightened her had she the wits to see
it.

His black eyes danced as though amused by the whole affair, as
though the earth-splitting sounds and the horrid glare were merely
things to frighten children. She swayed toward him as he came up the
steps, her face white, her green eyes burning.

"Good evening," he said, in his drawling voice, as he removed his
hat with a sweeping gesture. "Fine weather we're having. I hear you're
going to take a trip."

"If you make any jokes, I shall never speak to you again," she said
with quivering voice.

"Don't tell me you are frightened!" He pretended to be surprised and
smiled in a way that made her long to push him backwards down the steep
steps.

"Yes, I am! I'm frightened to death and if you had the sense God
gave a goat, you'd be frightened too. But we haven't got time to talk.
We must get out of here."

"At your service, Madam. But just where were you figuring on going?
I made the trip out here for curiosity, just to see where you were
intending to go. You can't go north or east or south or west. The
Yankees are all around. There's just one road out of town which the
Yankees haven't got yet and the army is retreating by that road. And
that road won't be open long. General Steve Lee's cavalry is fighting a
rear-guard action at Rough and Ready to hold it open long enough for
the army to get away. If you follow the army down the McDonough road,
they'll take the horse away from you and, while it's not much of a
horse, I did go to a lot of trouble stealing it. Just where are you
going?"

She stood shaking, listening to his words, hardly hearing them. But,
at his question she suddenly knew where she was going, knew that all
this miserable day she had known where she was going. The only
place.

"I'm going home," she said.

"Home? You mean to Tara?"

"Yes, yes! To Tara! Oh, Rhett, we must hurry!"

He looked at her as if she had lost her mind.

"Tara? God Almighty, Scarlett! Don't you know they fought all day at
Jonesboro? Fought for ten miles up and down the road from Rough and
Ready even into the streets of Jonesboro? The Yankees may be all over
Tara by now, all over the County. Nobody knows where they are but
they're in that neighborhood. You can't go home! You can't go right
through the Yankee army!"

"I will go home!" she cried. "I will! I will!"

"You little fool," and his voice was swift and rough. "You can't go
that way. Even if you didn't run into the Yankees, the woods are full
of stragglers and deserters from both armies. And lots of our troops
are still retreating from Jonesboro. They'd take the horse away from
you as quickly as the Yankees would. Your only chance is to follow the
troops down the McDonough road and pray that they won't see you in the
dark. You can't go to Tara. Even if you got there, you'd probably find
it burned down. I won't let you go home. It's insanity."

"I will go home!" she cried and her voice broke and rose to a
scream. "I will go home! You can't stop me! I will go home! I want my
mother! I'll kill you if you try to stop me! I will go home!"

Tears of fright and hysteria streamed down her face as she finally
gave way under the long strain. She beat on his chest with her fists
and screamed again: "I will! I will! If I have to walk every step of
the way!"

Suddenly she was in his arms, her wet cheek against the starched
ruffle of his shirt, her beating hands stilled against him. His hands
caressed her tumbled hair gently, soothingly, and his voice was gentle
too. So gentle, so quiet, so devoid of mockery, it did not seem Rhett
Butler's voice at all but the voice of some kind strong stranger who
smelled of brandy and tobacco and horses, comforting smells because
they reminded her of Gerald.

"There, there, darling," he said softly. "Don't cry. You shall go
home, my brave little girl. You shall go home. Don't cry."

She felt something brush her hair and wondered vaguely through her
tumult if it were his lips. He was so tender, so infinitely soothing,
she longed to stay in his arms forever. With such strong arms ab

=== SCENE 43 ===
drive her twenty-five miles in that rickety wagon. We'd
better leave her with Mrs. Meade."

"The Meades aren't home. I can't leave her."

"Very well. Into the wagon she goes. Where is that simple-minded
little wench?"

"Upstairs packing the trunk."

"Trunk? You can't take any trunk in that wagon. It's almost too
small to hold all of you and the wheels are ready to come off with no
encouragement. Call her and tell her to get the smallest feather bed in
the house and put it in the wagon."

Still Scarlett could not move. He took her arm in a strong grasp and
some of the vitality which animated him seemed to flow into her body.
If only she could be as cool and casual as he was! He propelled her
into the hall but she still stood helplessly looking at him. His lip
went down mockingly: "Can this be the heroic young woman who assured me
she feared neither God nor man?"

He suddenly burst into laughter and dropped her arm. Stung, she
glared at him, hating him.

"I'm not afraid," she said.

"Yes, you are. In another moment you'll be in a swoon and I have no
smelling salts about me."

She stamped her foot impotently because she could not think of
anything else to do—and without a word picked up the lamp and started
up the stairs. He was close behind her and she could hear him laughing
softly to himself. That sound stiffened her spine. She went into Wade's
nursery and found him sitting clutched in Prissy's arms, half dressed,
hiccoughing quietly. Prissy was whimpering. The feather tick on Wade's
bed was small and she ordered Prissy to drag it down the stairs and
into the wagon. Prissy put down the child and obeyed. Wade followed her
down the stairs, his hiccoughs stilled by his interest in the
proceedings.

"Come," said Scarlett, turning to Melanie's door and Rhett followed
her, hat in hand.

Melanie lay quietly with the sheet up to her chin. Her face was
deathly white but her eyes, sunken and black circled, were serene. She
showed no surprise at the sight of Rhett in her bedroom but seemed to
take it as a matter of course. She tried to smile weakly but the smile
died before it reached the corners of her mouth.

"We are going home, to Tara," Scarlett explained rapidly. "The
Yankees are coming. Rhett is going to take us. It's the only way,
Melly."

Melanie tried to nod her head feebly and gestured toward the baby.
Scarlett picked up the small baby and wrapped him hastily in a thick
towel. Rhett stepped to the bed.

"I'll try not to hurt you," he said quietly, tucking the sheet about
her. "See if you can put your arms around my neck."

Melanie tried but they fell back weakly. He bent, slipped an arm
under her shoulders and another across her knees and lifted her gently.
She did not cry out but Scarlett saw her bite her lip and go even
whiter. Scarlett held the lamp high for Rhett to see and started toward
the door when Melanie made a feeble gesture toward the wall.

"What is it?" Rhett asked softly.

"Please," Melanie whispered, trying to point. "Charles."

Rhett looked down at her as if he thought her delirious but Scarlett
understood and was irritated. She knew Melanie wanted the daguerreotype
of Charles which hung on the wall below his sword and pistol.

"Please," Melanie whispered again, "the sword."

"Oh, all right," said Scarlett and, after she had lighted Rhett's
careful way down the steps, she went back and unhooked the sword and
pistol belts. It would be awkward, carrying them as well as the baby
and the lamp. That was just like Melanie, not to be at all bothered
over nearly dying and having the Yankees at her heels but to worry
about Charles' things.

As she took down the daguerreotype, she caught a glimpse of Charles'
face. His large brown eyes met hers and she stopped for a moment to
look at the picture curiously. This man had been her husband, had lain
beside her for a few nights, had given her a child with eyes as soft
and brown as his. And she could hardly remember him.

The child in her arms waved small fists and mewed softly and she
looked down at him. For the first time, she realized that this was
Ashley's baby and suddenly wished with all the strength left in her
that he were her baby, hers and Ashley's.

Prissy came bounding up the stairs and Scarlett handed the child to
her. They went hastily down, the lamp throwing uncertain shadows on the
wall. In the hall, Scarlett saw a bonnet and put it on hurriedly, tying
the ribbons under her chin. It was Melanie's black mourning bonnet and
it did not fit Scarlett's head but she could not recall where she had
put her own bonnet.

She went out of the house and down the front steps, carrying the
lamp and trying to keep the saber from banging against her legs.
Melanie lay full length in the back of the wagon, and, beside her, were
Wade and the towel-swathed baby. Prissy climbed in and took the baby in
her arms.

The wagon was very small and the boards about the sides very low.
The wheels leaned inward as if their first revolution would make them
come off. She took one look at the horse and her heart sank. He was a
small emaciated animal and he stood with his head dispiritedly low,
almost between his forelegs. His back was raw with sores and harness
galls and he breathed as no sound horse should.

"Not much of an animal, is it?" grinned Rhett. "Looks like he'll die
in the shafts. But he's the best I could do. Some day I'll tell you
with embellishments just where and how I stole him and how narrowly I
missed getting shot. Nothing but my devotion to you would make me, at
this stage of my career, turn horse thief—and thief of such a horse.
Let me help you in."

He took the lamp from her and set it on the ground. The front seat
was only a narrow plank across the sides of the wagon. Rhett picked
Scarlett up bodily and swung her to it. How wonderful to be a man and
as strong as Rhett, she thought, tucking her wide skirts about her.
With Rhett beside her, she did not fear anything, neither the fire nor
the noise nor the Yankees.

He climbed onto the seat beside her and picked up the reins.

"Oh, wait!" she cried. "I forgot to lock the front door."

He burst into a roar of laughter and slapped the reins upon the
horse's back.

"What are you laughing at?"

"At you—locking the Yankees out," he said and the horse started
off, slowly, reluctantly. The lamp on the sidewalk burned on, making a
tiny yellow circle of light which grew smaller and smaller as they
moved away.


Rhett turned the horse's slow feet westward from Peachtree and the
wobbling wagon jounced into the rutty lane with a violence that
wrenched an abruptly stifled moan from Melanie. Dark trees interlaced
above their heads, dark silent houses loomed up on either side and the
white palings of fences gleamed faintly like a row of tombstones. The
narrow street was a dim tunnel, but faintly through the thick leafy
ceiling the hideous red glow of the sky penetrated and shadows chased
one another down the dark way like mad ghosts. The smell of smoke came
stronger and stronger, and on the wings of the hot breeze came a
pandemonium of sound from the center of town, yells, the dull rumbling
of heavy army wagons and the steady tramp of marching feet. As Rhett
jerked the horse's head and turned him into another street, another
deafening explosion tore the air and a monstrous skyrocket of flame and
smoke shot up in the west.

"That must be the last of the ammunition trains," Rhett said calmly.
"Why didn't they get them out this morning, the fools! There was plenty
of time. Well, too bad for us. I thought by circling around the center
of town, we might avoid the fire and that drunken mob on Decatur Street
and get through to the southwest part of town without any danger. But
we've got to cross Marietta Street somewhere and that explosion was
near Marietta Street or I miss my guess."

"Must—must we go through the fire?" Scarlett quavered.

"Not if we hurry," said Rhett and, springing from the wagon, he
disappeared into the darkness of a yard. When he returned he had a
small limb of a tree in his hand and he laid it mercilessly across the
horse's galled back. The animal broke into a shambling trot, his breath
panting and labored, and the wagon swayed forward with a jolt that
threw them about like popcorn in a popper. The baby wailed, and Prissy
and Wade cried out as they bruised themselves against the sides of the
wagon. But from Melanie there was no sound.

As they neared Marietta Street, the trees thinned out and the tall
flames roaring up above the buildings threw street and houses into a
glare of light brighter than day, casting monstrous shadows that
twisted as wildly as torn sails flapping in a gale on a sinking
ship.

Scarlett's teeth chattered but so great was her terror she was not
even aware of it. She was cold and she shivered, even though the heat
of the flames was already hot against their faces. This was hell and
she was in it and, if she could only have conquered her shaking knees,
she would have leaped from the wagon and run screaming back the dark
road they had come, back to the refuge of Miss Pittypat's house. She
shrank closer to Rhett, took his arm in fingers that trembled and
looked up at him for words, for comfort, for something reassuring. In
the unholy crimson glow that bathed them, his dark profile stood out as
clearly as the head on an ancient coin, beautiful, cruel and decadent.
At her touch he turned to her, his eyes gleaming with a light as
frightening as the fire. To Scarlett, he seemed as exhilarated and
contemptuous as if he got strong pleasure from the situation, as if he
welcomed the inferno they were approaching.

"Here," he said, laying a hand on one of the long-barreled pistols
in his belt. "If anyone, black or white, comes up on your side of the
wagon and tries to lay hand on the horse, shoot him and we'll ask
questions later. But for God's sake, don't shoot the nag in your
excitement."

"I—I have a pistol," she whispered, clutching the weapon in her
lap, perfectly certain that if death stared her in the face, she would
be too frightened to pull the trigger.

"You have? Where did you get it?"

"It's Charles'."

"Charles?"

"Yes, Charles—my husband."

"Did you ever really have a husband, my dear?" he whispered and
laughed softly.

If he would only be serious! If he would only hurry!

"How do you suppose I got my boy?" she cried fiercely.

"Oh, there are other ways than husbands—"

"Will you hush and hurry?"

But he drew rein abruptly, almost at Marietta Street, in the shadow
of a warehouse not yet touched by the flames.

"Hurry!" It was the only word in her mind. Hurry! Hurry!

"Soldiers," he said.

The detachment came down Marietta Street, between the burning
buildings, walking at route step, tiredly, rifles held any way, heads
down, too weary to hurry, too weary to care if timbers were crashing to
right and left and smoke billowing about them. They were all ragged, so
ragged that between officers and men there were no distinguishing
insignia except here and there a torn hat brim pinned up with a
wreathed "C.S.A." Many were barefooted and here and there a dirty
bandage wrapped a head or arm. They went past, looking neither to left
nor right, so silent that had it not been for the steady tramp of feet
they might all have been ghosts.

"Take a good look at them," came Rhett's gibing voice, "so you can
tell your grandchildren you saw the rear guard of the Glorious Cause in
retreat."

Suddenly she hated him, hated him with a strength that momentarily
overpowered her fear, made it seem petty and small. She knew her safety
and that of the others in the back of the wagon depended on him and him
alone, but she hated him for his sneering at those ragged ranks. She
thought of Charles who was dead and Ashley who might be dead and all
the gay and gallant young men who were rotting in shallow graves and
she forgot that she, too, had once thought them fools. She could not
speak, but hatred and disgust burned in her eyes as she stared at him
fiercely.

As the last of the soldiers were passing, a small figure in the rear
rank, his rifle butt dragging the ground, wavered, stopped and stared
after the others with a dirty face so dulled by fatigue he looked like
a sleepwalker. He was as small as Scarlett, so small his rifle was
almost as tall as he was, and his grime-smeared face was unbearded.
Sixteen at the most, thought Scarlett irrelevantly, must be one of the
Home Guard or a runaway schoolboy.

As she watched, the boy's knees buckled slowly and he went down in
the dust. Without a word, two men fell out of the last rank and walked
back to him. One, a tall spare man with a black beard that hung to his
belt, silently handed his own rifle and that of the boy to the other.
Then, stooping, he jerked the boy to his shoulders with an ease that
looked like sleight of hand. He started off slowly after the retreating
column, his shoulders bowed under the weight, while the boy, weak,
infuriated like a child teased by its elders, screamed out: "Put me
down, damn you! Put me down! I can walk!"

The bearded man said nothing and plodded on out of sight around the
bend of the road.

Rhett sat still, the reins lax in his hands, looking after them, a
curious moody look on his swarthy face. Then, there was a crash of
falling timbers near by and Scarlett saw a thin tongue of flame lick up
over the roof of the warehouse in whose sheltering shadow they sat.
Then pennons and battle flags of flame flared triumphantly to the sky
above them. Smoke burnt her nostrils and Wade and Prissy began
coughing. The baby made soft sneezing sounds.

"Oh, name of God, Rhett! Are you crazy? Hurry! Hurry!"

Rhett made no reply but brought the tree limb down on the horse's
back with a cruel force that made the animal leap forward. With all the
speed the horse could summon, they jolted and bounced across Marietta
Street. Ahead of them was a tunnel of fire where buildings were blazing
on either side of the short, narrow street that led down to the
railroad tracks. They plunged into it. A glare brighter than a dozen
suns dazzled their eyes, scorching heat seared their skins and the
roaring, cracking and crashing beat upon their ears in painful waves.
For an eternity, it seemed, they were in the midst of flaming torment
and then abruptly they were in semidarkness again.

As they dashed down the street and bumped over the railroad tracks,
Rhett applied the whip automatically. His face looked set and absent,
as though he had forgotten where he was. His broad shoulders were
hunched forward and his chin jutted out as though the thoughts in his
mind were not pleasant. The heat of the fire made sweat stream down his
forehead and cheeks but he did not wipe it off.

They pulled into a side street, then another, then turned and
twisted from one narrow street to another until Scarlett completely
lost her bearings and the roaring of the flames died behind them. Still
Rhett did not speak. He only laid on the whip with regularity. The red
glow in the sky was fading now and the road became so dark, so
frightening, Scarlett would have welcomed words, any words from him,
even jeering, insulting words, words that cut. But he did not
speak.

Silent or not, she thanked Heaven for the comfort of his presence.
It was so good to have a man beside her, to lean close to him and feel
the hard swell of his arm and know that he stood between her and
unnamable terrors, even though he merely sat there and stared.

"Oh, Rhett," she whispered clasping his arm, "What would we ever
have done without you? I'm so glad you aren't in the army!"

He turned his head and gave her one look, a look that made her drop
his arm and shrink back. There was no mockery in his eyes now. They
were naked and there was anger and something like bewilderment in them.
His lip curled down and he turned his head away. For a long time they
jounced along in a silence unbroken except for the faint wails of the
baby and sniffles from Prissy. When she was able to bear the sniffling
noise no longer, Scarlett turned and pinched her viciously, causing
Prissy to scream in good earnest before she relapsed into frightened
silence.

Finally Rhett turned the horse at right angles and after a while
they were on a wider, smoother road. The dim shapes of houses grew
farther and farther apart and unbroken woods loomed wall-like on either
side.

"We're out of town now," said Rhett briefly, drawing rein, "and on
the main road to Rough and Ready."

"Hurry. Don't stop!"

"Let the animal breathe a bit." Then turning to her, he asked
slowly: "Scarlett, are you still determined to do this crazy
thing?"

"Do what?"

"Do you still want to try to get through to Tara? It's suicidal.
Steve Lee's cavalry and the Yankee Army are between you and Tara."

Oh, Dear God! Was he going to refuse to take her home, after all
she'd gone through this terrible day?

"Oh, yes! Yes! Please, Rhett, let's hurry. The horse isn't
tired."

"Just a minute. You can't go down to Jonesboro on this road. You
can't follow the train tracks. They've been fighting up and down there
all day from Rough and Ready on south. Do you know any other roads,
small wagon roads or lanes that don't go through Rough and Ready or
Jonesboro?"

"Oh, yes," cried Scarlett in relief. "If we can just get near to
Rough and Ready, I know a wagon trace that winds off from the main
Jonesboro road and wanders around for miles. Pa and I used to ride it.
It comes out right near the MacIntosh place and that's only a mile from
Tara."

"Good. Maybe you can get past Rough and Ready all right. General
Steve Lee was there during the afternoon covering the retreat. Maybe
the Yankees aren't there yet. Maybe you can get through there, if Steve
Lee's men don't pick up your horse."

"_I_ can get through?"

"Yes, YOU." His voice was rough.

"But Rhett— You— Aren't going to take us?"

"No. I'm leaving you here."

She looked around wildly, at the livid sky behind them, at the dark
trees on either hand hemming them in like a prison wall, at the
frightened figures in the back of the wagon—and finally at him. Had
she gone crazy? Was she not hearing right?

He was grinning now. She could just see his white teeth in the faint
light and the old mockery was back in his eyes.

"Leaving us? Where—where are you going?"

"I am going, dear girl, with the army."

She sighed with relief and irritation. Why did he joke at this time
of all times? Rhett in the army! After all he'd said about stupid fools
who were enticed into losing their lives by a roll of drums and brave
words from orators—fools who killed themselves that wise men might
make money!

"Oh, I could choke you for scaring me so! Let's get on."

"I'm not joking, my dear. And I am hurt, Scarlett, that you do not
take my gallant sacrifice with better spirit. Where is your patriotism,
your love for Our Glorious Cause? Now is your chance to tell me to
return with my shield or on it. But, talk fast, for I want time to make
a brave speech before departing for the wars."

His drawling voice gibed in her ears. He was jeering at her and,
somehow, she knew he was jeering at himself too. What was he talking
about? Patriotism, shields, brave speeches? It wasn't possible that he
meant what he was saying. It just wasn't believable that he could talk
so blithely of leaving her here on this dark road with a woman who
might be dying, a new-born infant, a foolish black wench and a
frightened child, leaving her to pilot them through miles of battle
fields and stragglers and Yankees and fire and God knows what.

Once, when she was six years old, she had fallen from a tree, flat
on her stomach. She could still recall that sickening interval before
breath came back into her body. Now, as she looked at Rhett, she felt
the same way she had felt then, breathless, stunned, nauseated.

"Rhett, you are joking!"

She grabbed his arm and felt her tears of fright splash down her
wrist. He raised her hand and kissed it arily.

"Selfish to the end, aren't you, my dear? Thinking only of your own
precious hide and not of the gallant Confederacy. Think how our troops
will be heartened by my eleventh-hour appearance." There was a
malicious tenderness in his voice.

"Oh, Rhett," she wailed, "how can you do this to me? Why are you
leaving me?"

"Why?" he laughed jauntily. "Because, perhaps, of the betraying
sentimentality that lurks in all of us Southerners. Perhaps— perhaps
because I am ashamed. Who knows?"

"Ashamed? You should die of shame. To desert us here, alone,
helpless—"

"Dear Scarlett! You aren't helpless. Anyone as selfish and
determined as you are is never helpless. God help the Yankees if they
should get you."

He stepped abruptly down from the wago

=== SCENE 44 ===
elf
for this idiocy. I am annoyed at myself to find that so much
quixoticism still lingers in me. But our fair Southland needs every
man. Didn't our brave Governor Brown say just that? Not matter. I'm off
to the wars." He laughed suddenly, a ringing, free laugh that startled
the echoes in the dark woods.

"'I could not love thee, Dear, so much, loved I not Honour more.'
That's a pat speech, isn't it? Certainly better than anything I can
think up myself, at the present moment. For I do love you, Scarlett, in
spite of what I said that night on the porch last month."

His drawl was caressing and his hands slid up her bare arms, warm
strong hands. "I love you, Scarlett, because we are so much alike,
renegades, both of us, dear, and selfish rascals. Neither of us cares a
rap if the whole world goes to pot, so long as we are safe and
comfortable."

His voice went on in the darkness and she heard words, but they made
no sense to her. Her mind was tiredly trying to take in the harsh truth
that he was leaving her here to face the Yankees alone. Her mind said:
"He's leaving me. He's leaving me." But no emotion stirred.

Then his arms went around her waist and shoulders and she felt the
hard muscles of his thighs against her body and the buttons of his coat
pressing into her breast. A warm tide of feeling, bewildering,
frightening, swept over her, carrying out of her mind the time and
place and circumstances. She felt as limp as a rag doll, warm, weak and
helpless, and his supporting arms were so pleasant.

"You don't want to change your mind about what I said last month?
There's nothing like danger and death to give an added fillip. Be
patriotic, Scarlett. Think how you would be sending a soldier to his
death with beautiful memories."

He was kissing her now and his mustache tickled her mouth, kissing
her with slow, hot lips that were so leisurely as though he had the
whole night before him. Charles had never kissed her like this. Never
had the kisses of the Tarleton and Calvert boys made her go hot and
cold and shaky like this. He bent her body backward and his lips
traveled down her throat to where the cameo fastened her basque.

"Sweet," he whispered. "Sweet."

She saw the wagon dimly in the dark and heard the treble piping of
Wade's voice.

"Muvver! Wade fwightened!"

Into her swaying, darkened mind, cold sanity came back with a rush
and she remembered what she had forgotten for the moment—that she was
frightened too, and Rhett was leaving her, leaving her, the damned cad.
And on top of it all, he had the consummate gall to stand here in the
road and insult her with his infamous proposals. Rage and hate flowed
into her and stiffened her spine and with one wrench she tore herself
loose from his arms.

"Oh, you cad!" she cried and her mind leaped about, trying to think
of worse things to call him, things she had heard Gerald call Mr.
Lincoln, the MacIntoshes and balky mules, but the words would not come.
"You low-down, cowardly, nasty, stinking thing!" And because she could
not think of anything crushing enough, she drew back her arm and
slapped him across the mouth with all the force she had left. He took a
step backward, his hand going to his face.

"Ah," he said quietly and for a moment they stood facing each other
in the darkness. Scarlett could hear his heavy breathing, and her own
breath came in gasps as if she had been running hard.

"They were right! Everybody was right! You aren't a gentleman!"

"My dear girl," he said, "how inadequate."

She knew he was laughing and the thought goaded her.

"Go on! Go on now! I want you to hurry. I don't want to ever see you
again. I hope a cannon ball lands right on you. I hope it blows you to
a million pieces. I—"

"Never mind the rest. I follow your general idea. When I'm dead on
the altar of my country, I hope your conscience hurts you."

She heard him laugh as he turned away and walked back toward the
wagon. She saw him stand beside it, heard him speak and his voice was
changed, courteous and respectful as it always was when he spoke to
Melanie.

"Mrs. Wilkes?"

Prissy's frightened voice made answer from the wagon.

"Gawdlmighty, Cap'n Butler! Miss Melly done fainted away back
yonder."

"She's not dead? Is she breathing?"

"Yassuh, she breathin'."

"Then she's probably better off as she is. If she were conscious, I
doubt if she could live through all the pain. Take good care of her,
Prissy. Here's a shinplaster for you. Try not to be a bigger fool than
you are."

"Yassuh. Thankee suh."

"Good-by, Scarlett."

She knew he had turned and was facing her but she did not speak.
Hate choked all utterance. His feet ground on the pebbles of the road
and for a moment she saw his big shoulders looming up in the dark. Then
he was gone. She could hear the sound of his feet for a while and then
they died away. She came slowly back to the wagon, her knees
shaking.

Why had he gone, stepping off into the dark, into the war, into a
Cause that was lost, into a world that was mad? Why had he gone, Rhett
who loved the pleasures of women and liquor, the comfort of good food
and soft beds, the feel of fine linen and good leather, who hated the
South and jeered at the fools who fought for it? Now he had set his
varnished boots upon a bitter road where hunger tramped with tireless
stride and wounds and weariness and heartbreak ran like yelping wolves.
And the end of the road was death. He need not have gone. He was safe,
rich, comfortable. But he had gone, leaving her alone in a night as
black as blindness, with the Yankee Army between her and home.

Now she remembered all the bad names she had wanted to call him but
it was too late. She leaned her head against the bowed neck of the
horse and cried.

CHAPTER XXIV

The bright glare of morning sunlight streaming through the trees
overhead awakened Scarlett. For a moment, stiffened by the cramped
position in which she had slept, she could not remember where she was.
The sun blinded her, the hard boards of the wagon under her were harsh
against her body, and a heavy weight lay across her legs. She tried to
sit up and discovered that the weight was Wade who lay sleeping with
his head pillowed on her knees. Melanie's bare feet were almost in her
face and, under the wagon seat, Prissy was curled up like a black cat
with the small baby wedged in between her and Wade.

Then she remembered everything. She popped up to a sitting position
and looked hastily all around. Thank God, no Yankees in sight! Their
hiding place had not been discovered in the night. It all came back to
her now, the nightmare journey after Rhett's footsteps died away, the
endless night, the black road full of ruts and boulders along which
they jolted, the deep gullies on either side into which the wagon
slipped, the fear-crazed strength with which she and Prissy had pushed
the wheels out of the gullies. She recalled with a shudder how often
she had driven the unwilling horse into fields and woods when she heard
soldiers approaching, not knowing if they were friends or
foes—recalled, too, her anguish lest a cough, a sneeze or Wade'

=== SCENE 45 ===
d. Her clothes were crushed and wrinkled from sleeping in them and
she had never felt more acutely tired and sore in all her life. Muscles
she did not know she possessed ached from her unaccustomed exertions of
the night before and every movement brought sharp pain.

She looked down at Melanie and saw that her dark eyes were opened.
They were sick eyes, fever bright, and dark baggy circles were beneath
them. She opened cracking lips and whispered appealingly: "Water."

"Get up, Prissy," ordered Scarlett. "We'll go to the well and get
some water."

"But, Miss Scarlett! Dey mout be hants up dar. Sposin' somebody daid
up dar?"

"I'll make a hant out of you if you don't get out of this wagon,"
said Scarlett, who was in no mood for argument, as she climbed lamely
down to the ground.

And then she thought of the horse. Name of God! Suppose the horse
had died in the night! He had seemed ready to die when she unharnessed
him. She ran around the wagon and saw him lying on his side. If he were
dead, she would curse God and die too. Somebody in the Bible had done
just that thing. Cursed God and died. She knew just how that person
felt. But the horse was alive—breathing heavily, sick eyes half
closed, but alive. Well, some water would help him too.

Prissy climbed reluctantly from the wagon with many groans and
timorously followed Scarlett up the avenue. Behind the ruins the row of
whitewashed slave quarters stood silent and deserted under the
overhanging trees. Between the quarters and the smoked stone
foundations, they found the well, and the roof of it still stood with
the bucket far down the well. Between them, they wound up the rope, and
when the bucket of cool sparkling water appeared out of the dark
depths, Scarlett tilted it to her lips and drank with loud sucking
noises, spilling the water all over herself.

She drank until Prissy's petulant: "Well, Ah's thusty, too, Miss
Scarlett," made her recall the needs of the others.

"Untie the knot and take the bucket to the wagon and give them some.
And give the rest to the horse. Don't you think Miss Melanie ought to
nurse the baby? He'll starve."

"Law, Miss Scarlett, Miss Melly ain' got no milk—ain' gwine have
none."

"How do you know?"

"Ah's seed too many lak her."

"Don't go putting on any airs with me. A precious little you knew
about babies yesterday. Hurry now. I'm going to try to find something
to eat."

Scarlett's search was futile until in the orchard she found a few
apples. Soldiers had been there before her and there was none on the
trees. Those she found on the ground were mostly rotten. She filled her
skirt with the best of them and came back across the soft earth,
collecting small pebbles in her slippers. Why hadn't she thought of
putting on stouter shoes last night? Why hadn't she brought her sun
hat? Why hadn't she brought something to eat? She'd acted like a fool.
But, of course, she'd thought Rhett would take care of them.

Rhett! She spat on the ground, for the very name tasted bad. How she
hated him! How contemptible he had been! And she had stood there in the
road and let him kiss her—and almost liked it. She had been crazy last
night. How despicable he was!

When she came back, she divided up the apples and threw the rest
into the back of the wagon. The horse was on his feet now but the water
did not seem to have refreshed him much. He looked far worse in the
daylight than he had the night before. His hip bones stood out like an
old cow's, his ribs showed like a washboard and his back was a mass of
sores. She shrank from touching him as she harnessed him. When she
slipped the bit into his mouth, she saw that he was practically
toothless. As old as the hills! While Rhett was stealing a horse, why
couldn't he have stolen a good one?

She mounted the seat and brought down the hickory limb on his back.
He wheezed and started, but he walked so slowly as she turned him into
the road she knew she could walk faster herself with no effort
whatever. Oh, if only she didn't have Melanie and Wade and the baby and
Prissy to bother with! How swiftly she could walk home! Why, she would
run home, run every step of the way that would bring her closer to Tara
and to Mother.

=== SCENE 46 ===
anta, dumped Melanie into the
hospital and deserted her. But had she done that, she could never face
Ashley, either on this earth or in the hereafter and tell him she had
left his wife and child to die among strangers.

Oh, Ashley! Where was he tonight while she toiled down this haunted
road with his wife and baby? Was he alive and did he think of her as he
lay behind the bars at Rock Island? Or was he dead of smallpox months
ago, rotting in some long ditch with hundreds of other
Confederates?

Scarlett's taut nerves almost cracked as a sudden noise sounded in
the underbrush near them. Prissy screamed loudly, throwing herself to
the floor of the wagon, the baby beneath her. Melanie stirred feebly,
her hands seeking the baby, and Wade covered his eyes and cowered, too
frightened to cry. Then the bushes beside them crashed apart under
heavy hooves and a low moaning bawl assaulted their ears.

"It's only a cow," said Scarlett, her voice rough with fright.
"Don't be a fool, Prissy. You've mashed the baby and frightened Miss
Melly and Wade."

"It's a ghos'," moaned Prissy, writhing face down on the wagon
boards.

Turning deliberately, Scarlett raised the tree limb she had been
using as a whip and brought it down across Prissy's back. She was too
exhausted and weak from fright to tolerate weakness in anyone else.

"Sit up, you fool," she said, "before I wear this out on you."

Yelping, Prissy raised her head and peering over the side of the
wagon saw it was, indeed, a cow, a red and white animal which stood
looking at them appealingly with large frightened eyes. Opening its
mouth, it lowed again as if in pain.

"Is it hurt? That doesn't sound like an ordinary moo."

"Soun' ter me lak her bag full an' she need milkin' bad," said
Prissy, regaining some measure of control. "Spec it one of Mist'
MacIntosh's dat de niggers driv in de woods an' de Yankees din'
git."

"We'll take it with us," Scarlett decided swiftly. "Then we can have
some milk for the baby."

"How all we gwine tek a cow wid us, Miss Scarlett? We kain tek no
cow wid us. Cow ain' no good nohow effen she ain' been milked lately.
Dey bags swells up and busts. Dat's why she hollerin'."

"Since you know so much about it, take off your petticoat and tear
it up and tie her to the back of the wagon."

"Miss Scarlett, you knows Ah ain' had no petticoat fer a month an'
did Ah have one, Ah wouldn' put it on her fer nuthin'. Ah nebber had no
truck wid cows. Ah's sceered of cows."

Scarlett laid down the reins and pulled up her skirt. The lace-
trimmed petticoat beneath was the last garment she possessed that was
pretty—and whole. She untied the waist tape and slipped it down over
her feet, crushing the soft linen folds between her hands. Rhett had
brought her that linen and lace from Nassau on the last boat he slipped
through the blockade and she had worked a week to make the garment.
Resolutely she took it by the hem and jerked, put it in her mouth and
gnawed, until finally the material gave with a rip and tore the length.
She gnawed furiously, tore with both hands and the petticoat lay in
strips in her hands. She knotted the ends with fingers that bled from
blisters and shook from fatigue.

"Slip this over her horns," she dire

=== SCENE 47 ===
ster, but at last it was done and she picked up the lines. The
horse stood with head drooping dejectedly and refused to start.
Scarlett laid on the whip mercilessly. She hoped God would forgive her
for hurting a tired animal. If He didn't she was sorry. After all, Tara
lay just ahead, and after the next quarter of a mile, the horse could
drop in the shafts if he liked.

Finally he started slowly, the wagon creaking and the cow lowing
mournfully at every step. The pained animal's voice rasped on
Scarlett's nerves until she was tempted to stop and untie the beast.
What good would the cow do them anyway if there should be no one at
Tara? She couldn't milk her and, even if she could, the animal would
probably kick anyone who touched her sore udder. But she had the cow
and she might as well keep her. There was little else she had in this
world now.

Scarlett's eyes grew misty when, at last, they reached the bottom of
a gentle incline, for just over the rise lay Tara! Then her heart sank.
The decrepit animal would never pull the hill. The slope had always
seemed so slight, so gradual, in days when she galloped up it on her
fleet-footed mare. It did not seem possible it could have grown so
steep since she saw it last. The horse would never make it with the
heavy load.

Wearily she dismounted and took the animal by the bridle.

"Get out, Prissy," she commanded, "and take Wade. Either carry him
or make him walk. Lay the baby by Miss Melanie."

Wade broke into sobs and whimperings from which Scarlett could only
distinguish: "Dark—dark—Wade fwightened!"

"Miss Scarlett, Ah kain walk. Mah feets done blistered an' dey's
thoo mah shoes, an' Wade an' me doan weigh so much an'—"

"Get out! Get out before I pull you out! And if I do, I'm going to
leave you right here, in the dark by yourself. Quick, now!"

Prissy moaned, peering at the dark trees that closed about them on
both sides of the road—trees which might reach out and clutch her if
she left the shelter of the wagon. But she laid the baby beside
Melanie, scrambled to the ground and, reaching up, lifted Wade out. The
little boy sobbed, shrinking close to his nurse.

"Make him hush. I can't stand it," said Scarlett, taking the horse
by the bridle and pulling him to a reluctant start. "Be a little man,
Wade, and stop crying or I will come over there and slap you."

Why had God invented children, she thought savagely as she turned
her ankle cruelly on the dark road—useless, crying nuisances they
were, always demanding care, always in the way. In her exhaustion,
there was no room for compassion for the frightened child, trotting by
Prissy's side, dragging at her hand and sniffling—only a weariness
that she had borne him, only a tired wonder that she had ever married
Charles Hamilton.

"Miss Scarlett," whispered Prissy, clutching her mistress' arm,
"doan le's go ter Tara. Dey's not dar. Dey's all done gone. Maybe dey
daid—Maw an' all'm."

The echo of her own thoughts infuriated her and Scarlett shook off
the pinching fingers.

"Then give me Wade's hand. You can sit right down here and
stay."

"No'm! No'm!"

"Then HUSH!"

How slowly the horse moved! The moisture from his slobbering mouth
dripped down upon her hand. Through her mind ran a few words of the
song she had once sung with Rhett—she could not recall the rest:

"Just a few more days for to tote the weary load—"

"Just a few more steps," hummed her brain, over and over, "just a
few more steps for to tote the weary load."

Then they topped the rise and before them lay the oaks of Tara, a
towering dark mass against the darkening sky. Scarlett looked hastily
to see if there was a light anywhere. There was none.

"They are gone!" said her heart, like cold lead in her breast.
"Gone!"

She turned the horse's head into the

=== SCENE 48 ===
said tactfully. "An' ain' no use quarrelin' wid blessin's, 'cause
dat calf gwine ter mean a full cow an' plen'y buttermilk fer de young
Misses, lak dat Yankee doctah say dey' need."

"All right, go on. Any stock left?"

"No'm. Nuthin' 'cept one ole sow an' her litter. Ah driv dem inter
de swamp de day de Yankees come, but de Lawd knows how we gwine git
dem. She mean, dat sow."

"We'll get them all right. You and Prissy can start right now
hunting for her."

Pork was amazed and indignant.

"Miss Scarlett, dat a fe'el han's bizness. Ah's allus been a house
nigger."

A small fiend with a pair of hot tweezers plucked behind Scarlett's
eyeballs.

"You two will catch the sow—or get out of here, like the field
hands did."

Tears trembled in Pork's hurt eyes. Oh, if only Miss Ellen was here!
She understood such niceties and realized the wide gap between the
duties of a field hand and those of a house nigger.

"Git out, Miss Scarlett? Whar'd Ah git out to, Miss Scarlett?"

"I don't know and I don't care. But anyone at Tara who won't work
can go hunt up the Yankees. You can tell the others that too."

"Now, what about the corn and the cotton, Pork?"

"De cawn? Lawd, Miss Scarlett, dey pasture dey hawses in de cawn an'
cah'ied off whut de hawses din' eat or spile. An' dey driv dey cannons
an' waggins 'cross de cotton till it plum ruint, 'cept a few acres over
on de creek bottom dat dey din' notice. But dat cotton ain' wuth
foolin' wid, 'cause ain' but 'bout three bales over dar."

Three bales. Scarlett thought of the scores of bales Tara usually
yielded and her head hurt worse. Three bales. That was little more than
the shiftless Slatterys raised. To make matters worse, there was the
question of taxes. The Confederate government took cotton for taxes in
lieu of money, but three bales wouldn't even cover the taxes. Little
did it matter though, to her or the Confederacy, now that all the field
hands had run away and there was no one to pick the cotton.

"Well, I won't think of that either," she told herself. "Taxes
aren't a woman's job anyway. Pa ought to look after such things, but
Pa— I won't think of Pa now. The Confederacy can whistle for its
taxes. What we need now is something to eat."

"Pork, have any of you been to Twelve Oaks or the MacIntosh place to
see if there's anything left in the gardens there?"

"No, Ma'm! Us ain' lef' Tara. De Yankees mout git us."

"I'll send Dilcey over to MacIntosh. Perhaps she'll find something
there. And I'll go to Twelve Oaks."

"Who wid, chile?"

"By myself. Mammy must stay with the girls and Mr. Gerald
can't—"

Pork set up an outcry which she found infuriating. There might be
Yankees or mean niggers at Twelve Oaks. She mustn't go alone.

"That will be enough, Pork. Tell Dilcey to start immediately. And
you and Prissy go bring in the sow and her litter," she said briefly,
turning on her heel.

Mammy's old sunbonnet, faded but clean, hung on its peg on the back
porch and Scarlett put it on her head, remembering, as from another
world, the bonnet with the curling green plume which Rhett had brought
her from Paris. She picked up a large split-oak basket and started down
the back stairs, each step jouncing her head until her spine seemed to
be trying to crash through the top of her skull.

The road down to the river lay red and scorching between the ruined
cotton fields. There were no trees to cast a shade and the sun beat
down through Mammy's sunbonnet as if it were made of tarlatan instead
of heavy quilted calico, while the dust floating upward sifted into her
nose and th

=== SCENE 49 ===
t childish face blank with
consternation. "I couldn't split kindling! It would ruin my hands!"

"Look at mine," answered Scarlett with a frightening smile as she
pushed blistered and calloused palms toward her.

"I think you are hateful to talk to Baby and me like this!" cried
Suellen. "I think you are lying and trying to frighten us. If Mother
were only here, she wouldn't let you talk to us like this! Split
kindling, indeed!"

Suellen looked with weak loathing at her older sister, feeling sure
Scarlett said these things just to be mean. Suellen had nearly died and
she had lost her mother and she was lonely and scared and she wanted to
be petted and made much of. Instead, Scarlett looked over the foot of
the bed each day, appraising their improvement with a hateful new gleam
in her slanting green eyes and talked about making beds, preparing
food, carrying water buckets and splitting kindling. And she looked as
if she took a pleasure in saying such awful things.

Scarlett did take pleasure in it. She bullied the negroes and
harrowed the feelings of her sisters not only because she was too
worried and strained and tired to do otherwise but because it helped
her to forget her own bitterness that everything her mother had told
her about life was wrong.

Nothing her mother had taught her was of any value whatsoever now
and Scarlett's heart was sore and puzzled. It did not occur to her that
Ellen could not have foreseen the collapse of the civilization in which
she raised her daughters, could not have anticipated the disappearings
of the places in society for which she trained them so well. It did not
occur to her that Ellen had looked down a vista of placid future years,
all like the uneventful years of her own life, when she had taught her
to be gentle and gracious, honorable and kind, modest and truthful.
Life treated women well when they had learned those lessons, said
Ellen.

Scarlett thought in despair: "Nothing, no, nothing, she taught me is
of any help to me! What good will kindness do me now? What value is
gentleness? Better that I'd learned to plow or chop cotton like a
darky. Oh, Mother, you were wrong!"

She did not stop to think that Ellen's ordered world was gone and a
brutal world had taken its place, a world wherein every standard, every
value had changed. She only saw, or thought she saw, that her mother
had been wrong, and she changed swiftly to meet this new world for
which she was not prepared.

Only her feeling for Tara had not changed. She never came wearily
home across the fields and saw the sprawling white house that her heart
did not swell with love and the joy of homecoming. She never looked out
of her window at green pastures and red fields and tall tangled swamp
forest that a sense of beauty did not fill her. Her love for this land
with its softly rolling hills of bright-red soil, this beautiful red
earth that was blood colored, garnet, brick dust, vermilion, which so
miraculously grew green bushes starred with white puffs, was one part
of Scarlett which did not change when all else was changing. Nowhere
else in the world was there land like this.

When she looked at Tara she could understand, in part, why wars were
fought. Rhett was wrong when he said men fought wars for money. No,
they fought for swelling acres, softly furrowed by the plow, for
pastures green with stubby cropped grass, for lazy yellow rivers and
white houses that were cool amid magnolias. These were the only things
worth fighting for, the red earth which was theirs and would be their
sons', the red earth which would bear cotton for their sons and their
sons' sons.

The trampled acres of Tara were all that was left to her, now that
Mother and Ashl

=== SCENE 50 ===
always
in the next room. The mainspring of his existence was taken away when
she died and with it had gone his bounding assurance, his impudence and
his restless vitality. Ellen was the audience before which the
blustering drama of Gerald O'Hara had been played. Now the curtain had
been rung down forever, the footlights dimmed and the audience suddenly
vanished, while the stunned old actor remained on his empty stage,
waiting for his cues.

That morning the house was still, for everyone except Scarlett, Wade
and the three sick girls was in the swamp hunting the sow. Even Gerald
had aroused a little and stumped off across the furrowed fields, one
hand on Pork's arm and a coil of rope in the other. Suellen and Careen
had cried themselves to sleep, as they did at least twice a day when
they thought of Ellen, tears of grief and weakness oozing down their
sunken cheeks. Melanie, who had been propped up on pillows for the
first time that day, lay covered with a mended sheet between two
babies, the downy flaxen head of one cuddled in her arm, the kinky
black head of Dilcey's child held as gently in the other. Wade sat at
the bottom of the bed, listening to a fairy story.

To Scarlett, the stillness at Tara was unbearable, for it reminded
her too sharply of the deathlike stillness of the desolate country
through which she had passed that long day on her way home from
Atlanta. The cow and the calf had made no sound for hours. There were
no birds twittering outside her window and even the noisy family of
mockers who had lived among the harshly rustling leaves of the magnolia
for generations had no song that day. She had drawn a low chair close
to the open window of her bedroom, looking out on the front drive, the
lawn and the empty green pasture across the road, and she sat with her
skirts well above her knees and her chin resting on her arms on the
window sill. There was a bucket of well water on the floor beside her
and every now and then she lowered her blistered foot into it, screwing
up her face at the stinging sensation.

Fretting, she dug her chin into her arm. Just when she needed her
strength most, this toe had to fester. Those fools would never catch
the sow. It had taken them a week to capture the pigs, one by one, and
now after two weeks the sow was still at liberty. Scarlett knew that if
she were just there in the swamp with them, she could tuck up her dress
to her knees and take the rope and lasso the sow before you could say
Jack Robinson.

But even after the sow was caught—if she were caught? What then,
after she and her litter were eaten? Life would go on and so would
appetites. Winter was coming and there would be no food, not even the
poor remnants of the vegetables from the neighbors' gardens. They must
have dried peas and sorghum and meal and rice and—and— oh, so many
things. Corn and cotton seed for next spring's planting, and new
clothes too. Where was it all to come from and how would she pay for
it?

She had privately gone through Gerald's pockets and his cash box and
all she could find was stacks of Confederate bonds and three thousand
dollars in Confederate bills. That was about enough to buy one square
meal for them all, she thought ironically, now that Confederate money
was worth almost less than nothing at all. But if she did have money
and could find food, how would she haul it home to Tara? Why had God
let the old horse die? Even that sorry animal Rhett had stolen would
make all the difference in the world to them. Oh, those fine sleek
mules which used to kick up their heels in the pasture across the road,
and the handsome carriage horses, her little mare, the girls' ponies
and Gerald's big stallion racing about and tearing up the turf— Oh,
for one of them, even the balkiest mule!

But, no matter—when her foot healed she would walk to Jonesboro. It
would be the longest walk she had ever taken in her life, but walk it
she would. Even if th

=== SCENE 51 ===
randma rose abruptly and took Scarlett by the arm.

"You two stay here," she commanded, pushing Scarlett toward the back
porch. "I have a private word for this child. Help me down the steps,
Scarlett."

Young Miss and Sally said good-by and promised to come calling soon.
They were devoured by curiosity as to what Grandma had to say to
Scarlett but unless she chose to tell them, they would never know. Old
ladies were so difficult, Young Miss whispered to Sally as they went
back to their sewing.

Scarlett stood with her hand on the horse's bridle, a dull feeling
at her heart.

"Now," said Grandma, peering into her face, "what's wrong at Tara?
What are you keeping back?"

Scarlett looked up into the keen old eyes and knew she could tell
the truth, without tears. No one could cry in the presence of Grandma
Fontaine without her express permission.

"Mother is dead," she said flatly.

The hand on her arm tightened until it pinched and the wrinkled lids
over the yellow eyes blinked.

"Did the Yankees kill her?"

"She died of typhoid. Died—the day before I came home."

"Don't think about it," said Grandma sternly and Scarlett saw her
swallow. "And your Pa?"

"Pa is—Pa is not himself."

"What do you mean? Speak up. Is he ill?"

"The shock—he is so strange—he is not—"

"Don't tell me he's not himself. Do you mean his mind is
unhinged?"

It was a relief to hear the truth put so baldly. How good the old
lady was to offer no sympathy that would make her cry.

"Yes," she said dully, "he's lost his mind. He acts dazed and
sometimes he can't seem to remember that Mother is dead. Oh, Old Miss,
it's more than I can stand to see him sit by the hour, waiting for her
and so patiently too, and he used to have no more patience than a
child. But it's worse when he does remember that she's gone. Every now
and then, after he's sat still with his ear cocked listening for her,
he jumps up suddenly and stumps out of the house and down to the
burying ground. And then he comes dragging back with the tears all over
his face and he says over and over till I could scream: 'Katie
Scarlett, Mrs. O'Hara is dead. Your mother is dead,' and it's just like
I was hearing it again for the first time. And sometimes, late at
night, I hear him calling her and I get out of bed and go to him and
tell him she's down at the quarters with a sick darky. And he fusses
because she's always tiring herself out nursing people. And it's so
hard to get him back to bed. He's like a child. Oh, I wish Dr. Fontaine
was here! I know he could do something for Pa! And Melanie needs a
doctor too. She isn't getting over her baby like she should—"

"Melly—a baby? And she's with you?"

"Yes."

"What's Melly doing with you? Why isn't she in Macon with her aunt
and her kinfolks? I never thought you liked her any too well, Miss, for
all she was Charles' sister. Now, tell me all about it."

"It's a long story, Old Miss. Don't you want to go back in the house
and sit down?"

"I can stand," said Grandma shortly. "And if you told your story in
front of the others, they'd be bawling and making you feel sorry for
yourself. Now, let's have it."

Scarlett began haltingly with the siege and Melanie's condition, but
as her story progressed beneath the sharp old eyes which never faltered
in their gaze, she found words, words of power and horror. It all came
back to her, the sickeningly hot day of the baby's birth, the agony of
fear, the flight and Rhett's desertion. She spoke of the wild darkness
of the night, the blazing camp fires which might be friends or foes,
the gaunt chimneys which met her gaze in the morning sun, the dead men
and horses along the road, the hunger, the desolation, the fear that
Tara had been burned.

"I thought if I could just get home to Mother, she could manage
everything and I could lay down the weary load. On the way home I
thought the worst had already happened to me, but when I knew she was
dead I knew what t

=== SCENE 52 ===
enly began to cry. She had not heard from Frank
Kennedy since Christmas. She did not know if the lack of mail service
was the cause, or if he had merely trifled with her affections and then
forgotten her. Or maybe he had been killed in the last days of the war!
The latter would have been infinitely preferable to his forgetting her,
for at least there was some dignity about a dead love, such as Carreen
and India Wilkes had, but none about a deserted fiancee.

"Oh, in the name of God, hush!" said Scarlett.

"Oh, you can talk," sobbed Suellen, "because you've been married and
had a baby and everybody knows some man wanted you. But look at me! And
you've got to be mean and throw it up to me that I'm an old maid when I
can't help myself. I think you're hateful."

"Oh, hush! You know how I hate people who bawl all the time. You
know perfectly well old Ginger Whiskers isn't dead and that he'll come
back and marry you. He hasn't any better sense. But personally, I'd
rather be an old maid than marry him."

There was silence from the back of the wagon for a while and Carreen
comforted her sister with absent-minded pats, for her mind was a long
way off, riding paths three years old with Brent Tarleton beside her.
There was a glow, an exaltation in her eyes.

"Ah," said Melanie, sadly, "what will the South be like without all
our fine boys? What would the South have been if they had lived? We
could use their courage and their energy and their brains. Scarlett,
all of us with little boys must raise them to take the places of the
men who are gone, to be brave men like them."

"There will never again be men like them," said Carreen softly. "No
one can take their places."

They drove home the rest of the way in silence,


One day not long after this, Cathleen Calvert rode up to Tara at
sunset. Her sidesaddle was strapped on as sorry a mule as Scarlett had
ever seen, a flop-eared lame brute, and Cathleen was almost as sorry
looking as the animal she rode. Her dress was of faded gingham of the
type once worn only by house servants, and her sunbonnet was secured
under her chin by a piece of twine. She rode up to the front porch but
did not dismount, and Scarlett and Melanie, who had been watching the
sunset, went down the steps to meet her. Cathleen was as white as Cade
had been the day Scarlett called, white and hard and brittle, as if her
face would shatter if she spoke. But her back was erect and her head
was high as she nodded to them.

Scarlett suddenly remembered the day of the Wilkes barbecue when she
and Cathleen had whispered together about Rhett Butler. How pretty and
fresh Cathleen had been that day in a swirl of blue organdie with
fragrant roses at her sash and little black velvet slippers laced about
her small ankles. And now there was not a trace of that girl in the
stiff figure sitting on the mule.

"I won't get down, thank you," she said. "I just came to tell you
that I'm going to be married."

"What!"

"Who to?"

"Cathy, how grand!"

"When?"

"Tomorrow," said Cathleen quietly and there was something in her
voice which took

=== SCENE 53 ===
ng but, seeing her shiver, he took his
coat and placed it about her shoulders.

"Well," she said finally, "doesn't it occur to you that we'll have
to get the money somewhere?"

"Yes," he said, "but where?"

"I'm asking you," she replied, annoyed. The sense of relief at
unburdening herself had disappeared. Even if he couldn't help, why
didn't he say something comforting, even if it was only: "Oh, I'm so
sorry."

He smiled.

"In all these months since I've been home I've only heard of one
person, Rhett Butler, who actually has money," he said.

Aunt Pittypat had written Melanie the week before that Rhett was
back in Atlanta with a carriage and two fine horses and pocketfuls of
greenbacks. She had intimated, however, that he didn't come by them
honestly. Aunt Pitty had a theory, largely shared by Atlanta, that
Rhett had managed to get away with the mythical millions of the
Confederate treasury.

"Don't let's talk about him," said Scarlett shortly. "He's a skunk
if ever there was one. What's to become of us all?"

Ashley put down the axe and looked away and his eyes seemed to be
journeying to some far-off country where she could not follow.

"I wonder," he said. "I wonder not only what will become of us at
Tara but what will become of everybody in the South."

She felt like snapping out abruptly: "To hell with everybody in the
South! What about us?" but she remained silent because the tired
feeling was back on her more st

=== SCENE 54 ===
ith hate, as they
had hummed that day when she shoved the pistol barrel into the Yankee's
bearded face and fired. She wished she had that pistol now.

"I'll tear this house down, stone by stone, and burn it and sow
every acre with salt before I see either of you put foot over this
threshold," she shouted. "Get out, I tell you! Get out!"

Jonas glared at her, started to say more and then walked toward the
carriage. He climbed in beside his whimpering wife and turned the
horse. As they drove off, Scarlett had the impulse to spit at them. She
did spit. She knew it was a common, childish gesture but it made her
feel better. She wished she had done it while they could see her.

Those damned nigger lovers daring to come here and taunt her about
her poverty! That hound never intended offering her a price for Tara.
He just used that as an excuse to come and flaunt himself and Emmie in
her face. The dirty Scallawags, the lousy trashy poor whites, boasting
they would live at Tara!

Then, sudden terror struck her and her rage melted. God's nightgown!
They will come and live here! There was nothing she could do to keep
them from buying Tara, nothing to keep them from levying on every
mirror and table and bed, on Ellen's shining mahogany and rosewood, and
every bit of it precious to her, scarred though it was by the Yankee
raiders. And the Robillard silver too. I won't let them do it, thought
Scarlett vehemently. No, not if I've got to burn the place down! Emmie
Slattery will never set her foot on a single bit of flooring Mother
ever walked on!

She closed the door and leaned against it and she was very
frightened. More frightened even than she had been that day when
Sherman's army was in the house. That day the worst she could fear was
that Tara would be burned over her head. But this was worse— these low
common creatures living in this house, bragging to their low common
friends how they had turned the proud O'Haras out. Perhaps they'd even
bring negroes here to dine and sleep. Will had told her Jonas made a
great to-do about being equal with the negroes, ate with them, visited
in their houses, rode them around with him in his carriage, put his
arms around their shoulders.

When she thought of the possibility of this final insult to Tara,
her heart pounded so hard she could scarcely breathe. She was trying to
get her mind on her problem, trying to figure some way out, but each
time she collected her thoughts, fresh gusts of rage and fear shook
her. There must be some way out, there must be someone somewhere who
had money she could borrow. Money couldn't just dry up and blow away.
Somebody had to have money. Then the laughing words of Ashley came back
to her:

"Only one person, Rhett Butler...who has money."

Rhett Butler. She walked quickly into the parlor and shut the door
behind her. The dim gloom of drawn blinds and winter twilight closed
about her. No one would think of hunting for her here and she wanted
time to think, undisturbed. The idea which had just occurred to her was
so simple she wondered why she had not thought of it before.

"I'll get the money from Rhett. I'll sell him the diamond earbobs.
Or I'll borrow the money from him and let him keep the earbobs till I
can pay him back."

For a moment, relief was so great she felt weak. She would pay the
taxes and laugh in Jonas Wilkerson's face. But close on this happy
thought came relentless knowledge.

"It's not only for this year that I'll need tax money. There's next
year and all the years of my life. If I pay up this time, they'll raise
the taxes higher next time till they drive me out. If I make a good
cotton crop, they'll tax it till I'll get nothing for it or maybe
confiscate it outright and say it's Confederate cotton. The Yankees and
the scoundrels teamed up with them have got me where they want me. All
my life, as long as I live, I'll be afraid they'll get me somehow. All
my life I'll be scared and scrambling for money and working myself to
death, only to see my work go for nothing and my cotton stolen....
Just borrowing three hundred dollars for the taxes will be only a
stopgap. What I want is to get out of this fix, for good—so I can go
to sleep at night without worrying over what's going to happen to me
tomorrow, and next month, and next year."

Her mind ticked on steadily. Coldly and logically an idea grew in
her brain. She thought of Rhett, a flash of white teeth against swarthy
skin, sardonic black eyes caressing her. She recalled the hot night in
Atlanta, close to the end of the siege, when he sat on Aunt Pitty's
porch half hidden in the summer darkness, and she felt again the heat
of his hand upon her arm as he said: "I want you more than I have ever
wanted any woman—and I've waited longer for you than I've ever waited
for any woman."

"I'll marry him," she thought coolly. "And then I'll never have to
bother about money a

=== SCENE 55 ===
that Tara was safe, that the family was fed
and clothed, that she would never again have to bruise herself against
stone walls!

She felt very old. The afternoon's events had drained her of all
feeling, first the startling news about the taxes, then Ashley and,
last, her murderous rage at Jonas Wilkerson. No, there was no emotion
left in her. If all her capacity to feel had not been utterly
exhausted, something in her would have protested against the plan
taking form in her mind, for she hated Rhett as she hated no other
person in all the world. But she could not feel. She could only think
and her thoughts were very practical.

"I said some terrible things to him that night when he deserted us
on the road, but I can make him forget them," she thought
contemptuously, still sure of her power to charm. "Butter won't melt in
my mouth when I'm around him. I'll make him think I always loved him
and was just upset and frightened that night. Oh, men are so conceited
they'll believe anything that flatters them...I must never let him
dream what straits we're in, not till I've got him. Oh, he mustn't
know! If he even suspected how poor we are, he'd know it was his money
I wanted and not himself. After all, there's no way he could know, for
even Aunt Pitty doesn't know the worst. And after I've married him,
he'll have to help us. He can't let his wife's people starve."

His wife. Mrs. Rhett Butler. Something of repulsion, buried deep
beneath her cold thinking, stirred faintly and then was stilled. She
remembered the embarrassing and disgusting events of her brief
honeymoon with Charles, his fumbling hands, his awkwardness, his
incomprehensible emotions—and Wade Hampton.

"I won't think about it now. I'll bother about it after I've married
him...."

After she had married him. Memory rang a bell. A chill went down her
spine. She remembered again that night on Aunt Pitty's porch,
remembered how she asked him if he was proposing to her, remembered how
hatefully he had laughed and said: "My dear, I'm not a marrying
man."

Suppose he was still not a marrying man. Suppose despite all her
charms and wiles, he refused to marry her. Suppose—oh, terrible
thought!—suppose he had completely forgotten about her and was chasing
after some other woman.

"I want you more than I have ever wanted any woman...."

Scarlett's nails dug into her palms as she clenched her fists. "If
he's forgotten me, I'll make him remember me. I'll make him want me
again."

And, if he would not marry her but still wanted her, there was a way
to get the money. After all, he had once asked her to be his
mistress.

In the dim grayness of the parlor she fought a quick decisive battle
with the three most binding ties of her soul—the memory of Ellen, the
teachings of her religion and her love for Ashley. She knew that what
she had in her mind must be hideous to her mother even in that warm
far-off Heaven where she surely was. She knew that fornication was a
mortal sin. And she knew that, loving Ashley as she did, her plan was
doubly prostitution.

But all these things went down before the merciless coldness of her
mind and the goad of desperation. Ellen was dead and perhaps death gave
an understanding of all things. Religion forbade fornication on pain of
hell fire but if the Church thought she was going to leave one stone
unturned in saving Tara and saving the family from starving—well, let
the Church bother about that. She wouldn't. At least, not now. And
Ashley—Ashley didn't want her. Yes, he did want her. The memory of his
warm mouth on hers told her that. But he would never take her away with
him. Strange that going away with Ashley did not seem like a sin, but
with Rhett—

In the dull twilight of the winter afternoon she came to the end of
the long road which had begun the night Atlanta fell. She had set her
feet upon that road a spoiled, selfish and untried girl, full of youth,
warm of emotion, easily bewildered by life. Now, at the end of the
road, there was nothing left of that girl. Hunger and hard labor, fear
and constant strain, the terrors of war and the terrors of
Reconstruction had taken away all warmth and youth and softness. About
the core of he

=== SCENE 56 ===
day, and it was as if the last crevice in the shell had been sealed,
the final layer hardened. She had become what Grandma Fontaine had
counseled against, a woman who had seen the worst and so had nothing
else to fear. Not life nor Mother nor loss of love nor public opinion.
Only hunger and her nightmare dream of hunger could make her
afraid.

A curious sense of lightness, of freedom, pervaded her now that she
had finally hardened her heart against all that bound her to the old
days and the old Scarlett. She had made her decision and, thank God,
she wasn't afraid. She had nothing to lose and her mind was made
up.

If she could only coax Rhett into marrying her, all would be
perfect. But if she couldn't—well she'd get the money just the same.
For a brief moment she wondered with impersonal curiosity what would be
expected of a mistress. Would Rhett insist on keeping her in Atlanta as
people said he kept the Watling woman? If he made her stay in Atlanta,
he'd have to pay well—pay enough to balance what her absence from Tara
would be worth. Scarlett was very ignorant of the hidden side of men's
lives and had no way of knowing just what the arrangement might
involve. And she wondered if she would have a baby. That would be
distinctly terrible.

"I won't think of that now. I'll think of it later," and she pushed
the unwelcome idea into the back of her mind lest it shake her
resolution. She'd tell the family tonight she was going to Atlanta to
borrow money, to try to mortgage the farm if necessary. That would be
all they needed to know until such an evil day when they might find out
differently.

With the thought of action, her head went up and her shoulders went
back. This affair was not going to be easy, she knew. Formerly, it had
been Rhett who asked for her favors and she who held the power. Now she
was the beggar and a beggar in no position to dictate terms.

"But I won't go to him like a beggar. I'll go like a queen granting
favors. He'll never know."

She walked to the long pier glass and looked at herself, her head
held high. And she saw framed in the cracking gilt molding a stranger.
It was as if she were really seeing herself for the first time in a
year. She had glanced in the mirror every morning to see that her face
was clean and her hair tidy but she had always been too pressed by
other things to really see herself. But this stranger! Surely this thin
hollow-cheeked woman couldn't be Scarlett O'Hara! Scarlett O'Hara had a
pretty, coquettish, high- spirited face. This face at which she stared
was not pretty at all and had none of the charm she remembered so well.
It was white and strained and the black brows above slanting green eyes
swooped up startlingly against the white skin like frightened bird's
wings. There was a hard and hunted look about this face.

"I'm not pretty enough to get him!" she thought and desperation came
back to her. "I'm thin—oh, I'm terribly thin!"

She patted her cheeks, felt frantically at her collar bones, feeling
them stand out through her basque. And her breasts were so small,
almost as small as Melanie's. She'd have to put ruffles in her bosom to
make them look larger and she had always had contempt for girls who
resorted to such subterfuges. Ruffles! That brought up another thought.
Her clothes. She looked down at her dress, spreading its mended folds
wide between her hands. Rhett liked women who were well dressed,
fashionably dressed. She remembered with longing the flounced green
dress she had worn when she first came out of mourning, the dress she
wore with the green plumed bonnet he had brought her and she recalled
the approving compliments he had paid her. She remembered, too, with
hate sharpened by envy the red plaid dress, the red-topped boots with
tassels and the pancake hat of Emmie Slattery. They were gaudy but they
were new and fashionable and certainly they caught the eye. And, oh,
how she wanted to catch the eye! Especially the eye of Rhett Butler! If
he should see her in her old clothes, he'd know everything was wrong at
Tara. And he must not know.

What a fool she had been to think she could go to Atlanta and have
him for the asking, she with her scrawny neck and hungry cat eyes and
raggedy dress! If she hadn't been able to pry a proposal from him at
the height of her beauty, when she had her prettiest clothes, how could
she expect to get one now when she was ugly and dressed tackily? If
Miss Pitty's story was true, he must

=== SCENE 57 ===
course I'll go to the wedding.
And I'll need a new dress to wear."

"De dress you got on'll be jes' as nice as Miss Fanny's weddin'
dress. Miss Pitty done wrote dat de Elsings mighty po'."

"But I've got to have a new dress! Mammy, you don't know how we need
money. The taxes—"

"Yas'm, Ah knows all 'bout de taxes but—"

"You do?"

"Well'm, Gawd give me ears, din' he, an' ter hear wid? Specially
w'en Mist' Will doan never tek trouble ter close de do'."

Was there nothing Mammy did not overhear? Scarlett wondered how that
ponderous body which shook the floors could move with such savage
stealth when its owner wished to eavesdrop.

"Well, if you heard all that, I suppose you heard Jonas Wilkerson
and that Emmie—"

"Yas'm," said Mammy with smoldering eyes.

"Well, don't be a mule, Mammy. Don't you see I've got to go to
Atlanta and get money for the taxes? I've got to get some money. I've
got to do it!" She hammered one small fist into the other. "Name of
God, Mammy, they'll turn us all out into the road and then where'll we
go? Are you going to argue with me about a little matter of Mother's
curtains when that trash Emmie Slattery who killed Mother is fixing to
move into this house and sleep in the bed Mother slept in?"

Mammy shifted from one foot to another like a restive elephant. She
had a dim feeling that she was being got around.

"No'm, Ah ain' wantin' ter see trash in Miss Ellen's house or us all
in de road but—" She fixed Scarlett with a suddenly accusing eye: "Who
is you fixin' ter git money frum dat you needs a new dress?"

"That," said Scarlett, taken aback, "is my own business."

Mammy looked at her piercingly, just as she had done when Scarlett
was small and had tried unsuccessfully to palm off plausible excuses
for misdeeds. She seemed to be reading her mind and Scarlett dropped
her eyes unwillingly, the first feeling of guilt at her intended
conduct creeping over her.

"So you needs a spang new pretty dress ter borry money wid. Dat doan
lissen jes' right ter me. An' you ain' sayin' whar de money ter come
frum."

"I'm not saying anything," said Scarlett indignantly. "It's my own
business. Are you going to give me that curtain and help me make the
dress?"

"Yas'm," said Mammy softly, capitulating with a suddenness which
aroused all the suspicion in Scarlett's mind. "Ah gwine he'p you mek it
an' Ah specs we mout git a petticoat outer de satin linin' of de
po'teers an' trim a pa'r pantalets wid de lace cuttins."

She handed the velvet curtain back to Scarlett and a sly smile
spread over her face.

"Miss Melly gwine ter 'Lanta wid you, Miss Scarlett?"

"No," said Scarlett sharply, beginning to realize what was coming.
"I'm going by myself."

"Dat's whut you thinks," said Mammy firmly, "but Ah is gwine wid you
an' dat new dress. Yas, Ma'm, eve'y step of de way."

For an instant Scarlett envisaged her trip to Atlanta and her
conversation with Rhett with Mammy glowering chaperonage like a large
black Cerberus in the background. She smiled again and put a hand on
Mammy's arm.

"Mammy darling, you're sweet to want to go with me and help me, but
how on earth would the folks here get on without you? You know you just
about run Tara."

"Huh!" said Mammy. "Doan do no good ter sweet talk me, Miss
Scarlett. Ah been knowin' you sence Ah put de fust pa'r of diapers on
you. Ah's said Ah's gwine ter 'Lanta wid you an' gwine Ah is. Miss
Ellen be tuhnin' in her grabe at you gwine up dar by yo'seff wid dat
town full up wid Yankees an' free niggers an' sech like."

"But I'll be at Aunt Pittypat's," Scarlett offered frantically.

"Miss Pittypat a fine woman an' she think she see eve'ything but she
doan," said Mammy, and turning with the majestic air of having closed
the interview, she went into the hall. The boards trembled as she
called:

"Prissy, child! Fly up de stairs an' fotch Miss Scarlett's pattun
box frum de attic an' try an' fine de scissors without takin' all night
'bout it."

"This is a fine mess," thought Scarlett dejectedly. "I'd as soon
have a bloodhound after me."

After supper had been cleared away, Scarlett and Mammy spread
patterns on the dining-room table while Suellen and Carreen busily
ripped satin linings from curtains and Melanie brushed the velvet with
a clean hairbrush to remove the dust. Gerald, Will and Ashley sat about
the room smoking, smiling at the feminine tumult. A feeling of
pleasurable excitement which seemed to emanate from Scarlett was on
them all, an excitement they could not understand. There was color in
Scarlett's face and a bright hard glitter in her eyes and she laughed a
good deal. Her laughter pleased them all, for it had been months since
they had heard her really laugh. Especially did it please Gerald. His
eyes were less vague than usual as they followed her swishing figure
about the room and he patted her approvingly whenever she was within
reach. The girls were as excited as if preparing for a ball and they
ripped and cut and basted as if making a ball dress of their own.

Scarlett was going to Atlanta to borrow money or to mortgage Tara if
necessary. But what was a mortgage, after all? Scarlett said they could
easily pay it off out of next year's cotton and have money left over,
and she said it with such finality they did not think to question. And
when they asked who was going to lend the money she said: "Layovers
catch meddlers," so archly they all laughed and teased her about her
millionaire friend.

"It must be Captain Rhett Butler," said Melanie slyly and they
exploded with mirth at this absurdity, knowing how Scarlett hated him
and never failed to refer to him as "that skunk, Rhett Butler."

But Scarlett did not laugh at this and Ashley, who had laughed,
stopped abruptly as he saw Mammy shoot a quick, guarded glance at
Scarlett.

Suellen, moved to generosity by the party spirit of the occasion,
produced her Irish-lace collar, somewhat worn but still pretty, and
Carreen insisted that Scarlett wear her slippers to Atlanta, for they
were in better condition than any others at Tara. Melanie begged Mammy
to leave her enough velvet scraps to recover the frame of her battered
bonnet and brought shouts of laughter when she said the old rooster was
going to part with his gorgeous bronze and green-black tail feathers
unless he took to the swamp immediately.

Scarlett, watching the flying fingers, heard the laughter and looked
at them all with concealed bitterness and contempt.

"They haven't an idea what is really happening to me or to
themselves or to the South. They still think, in spite of everything,
that nothing really dreadful can happen to any of them because they are
who they are, O'Haras, Wilkeses, Hamiltons. Even the darkies feel that
way. Oh, they're all fools! They'll never realize! They'll go right on
thinking and living as they always have, and nothing will change them.
Melly can dress in rags and pick cotton and even help me murder a man
but it doesn't change her. She's still the shy well-bred Mrs. Wilkes,
the perfect lady! And Ashley can see death and war and be wounded and
lie in jail and come home to less than nothing and still be the same
gentleman he was when he had all Twelve Oaks behind him. Will is
different. He knows how things really are but then Will never had
anything much to lose. And as for Suellen and Carreen—they think all
this is just a temporary matter. They don't change to meet changed
conditions because they think it'll all be over soon. They think God is
going to work a miracle especially for their benefit. But He won't. The
only miracle that's going to be worked around here is the one I'm going
to work on Rhett Butler...They won't change. Maybe they can't
change. I'm the only one who's changed— and I wouldn't have changed if
I could have helped it."

Mammy finally turned the men out of the dining room and closed the
door, so the fitting could begin. Pork helped Gerald upstairs to bed
and Ashley and Will were left alone in the lamplight in the front hall.
They were silent for a while and Will chewed his tobacco like a placid
ruminant animal. But his mild face was far from placid.

"This goin' to Atlanta," he said at last in a slow voice, "I don't
like it. Not one bit."

Ashley looked at Will quickly and then looked away, saying nothing
but wondering if Will had the same awful suspicion which was haunting
him. But that was impossible. Will didn't know what had taken place in
the orchard that afternoon and how it had driven Scarlett to
desperation. Will couldn't have noticed Mammy's face when Rhett
Butler's name was mentioned and, besides, Will didn't know about
Rhett's money or his foul reputation. At least, Ashley did not think he
could know these things, but since coming back to Tara he had realized
that Will, like Mammy, seemed to know things without being told, to
sense them before they happened. There was something ominous in the
air, exactly what Ashley did not know, but he was powerless to save
Scarlett from it. She had not met his eyes once that evening and the
hard bright gaiety with which she had treated him was frightening. The
suspicions wh

=== SCENE 58 ===
rd her and, leaning from the box,
questioned: "Cah'ige, lady? Two bits fer any whar in 'Lanta."

Mammy threw him an annihilating glance.

"A hired hack!" she rumbled. "Nigger, does you know who we is?"

Mammy was a country negro but she had not always been a country
negro and she knew that no chaste woman ever rode in a hired
conveyance—especially a closed carriage—without the escort of some
male member of her family. Even the presence of a negro maid would not
satisfy the conventions. She gave Scarlett a glare as she saw her look
longingly at the hack.

"Come 'way frum dar, Miss Scarlett! A hired hack an' a free issue
nigger! Well, dat's a good combination."

"Ah ain' no free issue nigger," declared the driver with heat. "Ah
b'longs ter Ole Miss Talbot an' disyere her cah'ige an' Ah drives it
ter mek money fer us."

"Whut Miss Talbot is dat?"

"Miss Suzannah Talbot of Milledgeville. Us done move up hyah affer
Old Marse wuz kilt."

"Does you know her, Miss Scarlett?"

"No," said Scarlett, regretfully. "I know so few Milledgeville
folks."

"Den us'll walk," said Mammy sternly. "Drive on, nigger."

She picked up the carpetbag which held Scarlett's new velvet frock
and bonnet and nightgown and tucked the neat bandanna bundle that
contained her own belongings under her arm and shepherded Scarlett
across the wet expanse of cinders. Scarlett did not argue the matter,
much as she preferred to ride, for she wished no disagreement with
Mammy. Ever since yesterday afternoon when Mammy had caught her with
the velvet curtains, there had been an alert suspicious look in her
eyes which Scarlett did not like. It was going to be difficult to
escape from her chaperonage and she did not intend to rouse Mammy's
fighting blood before it was absolutely necessary.

As they walked along the narrow sidewalk toward Peachtree, Scarlett
was dismayed and sorrowful, for Atlanta looked so devastated and
different from what she remembered. They passed beside what had been
the Atlanta Hotel where Rhett and Uncle Henry had lived and of that
elegant hostelry there remained only a shell, a part of the blackened
walls. The warehouses which had bordered the train tracks for a quarter
of a mile and held tons of military supplies had not been rebuilt and
their rectangular foundations looked dreary under the dark sky. Without
the wall of buildings on either side and with the car shed gone, the
railroad tracks seemed bare and exposed. Somewhere amid these ruins,
undistinguishable from the others,

=== SCENE 59 ===
ding
up to nothing. Where the Whitings' home had been was bare ground. Even
the foundation stones and the brick chimneys were gone and there were
wagon tracks where they had been carted away. The brick house of the
Elsings still stood, with a new roof and a new second floor. The
Bonnell home, awkwardly patched and roofed with rude boards instead of
shingles, managed to look livable for all its battered appearance. But
in neither house was there a face at the window or a figure on the
porch, and Scarlett was glad. She did not want to talk to anyone
now.

Then the new slate roof of Aunt Pitty's house came in view with its
red-brick walls, and Scarlett's heart throbbed. How good of the Lord
not to level it beyond repair! Coming out of the front yard was Uncle
Peter, a market basket on his arm, and when he saw Scarlett and Mammy
trudging along, a wide, incredulous smile split his black face.

I could kiss the old black fool, I'm so glad to see him, thought
Scarlett, joyfully and she called: "Run get Auntie's swoon bottle,
Peter! It's really me!"


That night the inevitable hominy and dried peas were on Aunt Pitty's
supper table and, as Scarlett ate them, she made a vow that these two
dishes would never appear on her table when she had money again. And,
no matter what price she had to pay, she was going to have money again,
more than just enough to pay the taxes on Tara. Somehow, some day she
was going to have plenty of money if she had to commit murder to get
it.

In the yellow lamplight of the dining room, she asked Pitty about
her finances, hoping against hope that Charles' family might be able to
lend her the money she needed. The questions were none too subtle but
Pitty, in her pleasure at having a member of the family to talk to, did
not even notice the bald way the questions were put. She plunged with
tears into the details of her misfortunes. She just didn't know where
her farms and town property and money had gone but everything had
slipped away. At least, that was what Brother Henry told her. He hadn't
been able to pay the taxes on her estate. Everything except the house
she was living in was gone and Pitty did not stop to think that the
house had never been hers but was the joint property of Melanie and
Scarlett. Brother Henry could just barely pay taxes on this house. He
gave her a little something every month to live on and, though it was
very humiliating to take money from him, she had to do it.

"Brother Henry says he doesn't know how he'll make ends meet with
the load he's carrying and the taxes so high but, of course, he's
probably lying and has loads of money and just won't give me much."

Scarlett knew Uncle Henry wasn't lying. The few letters she had had
from him in connection with Charles' property showed that. The old
lawyer was battling valiantly to save the house and the one piece of
downtown property where the warehouse had been, so Wade and Scarlett
would have something left from the wreckage. Scarlett knew he was
carrying these taxes for her at a great sacrifice.

"Of course, he hasn't any money," thought Scarlett grimly. "Well,
check him and Aunt Pitty off my list. There's nobody left but Rhett.
I'll have to do it. I must do it. But I mustn't think about it now...I
must get her to talking about Rhett so I can casually suggest to
her to invite him to call tomorrow."

She smiled and squeezed the plump palms of Aunt Pitty between her
own.

"Darling Auntie," she said, "don't let's talk about distressing
things like money any more. Let's forget about them and talk of
pleasanter things. You must tell me all the news about our old friends.
How is Mrs. Merriwether and Maybelle? I heard that Maybelle's little
Creole came home safely. How are the Elsings and Dr. and Mrs.
Meade?"

Pittypat bright

=== SCENE 60 ===
g shell and it did something to his legs— makes
them—makes them, well, I hate to use the word but it makes him
spraddle. It gives him a very vulgar appearance when he walks— well,
it doesn't look very pretty. I don't see why she's marrying him."

"Girls have to marry someone."

"Indeed, they do not," said Pitty, ruffling. "I never had to."

"Now, darling, I didn't mean you! Everybody knows how popular you
were and still are! Why, old Judge Canton used to throw sheep's eyes at
you till I—"

"Oh, Scarlett, hush! That old fool!" giggled Pitty, good humor
restored. "But, after all, Fanny was so popular she could have made a
better match and I don't believe she loves this Tom what's- his-name. I
don't believe she's ever gotten over Dallas McLure getting killed, but
she's not like you, darling. You've remained so faithful to dear
Charlie, though you could have married dozens of times. Melly and I
have often said how loyal you were to his memory when everyone else
said you were just a heartless coquette."

Scarlett passed over this tactless confidence and skillfully led
Pitty from one friend to another but all the while she was in a fever
of impatience to bring the conversation around to Rhett. It would never
do for her to ask outright about him, so soon after arriving. It might
start the old lady's mind to working on channels better left untouched.
There would be time enough for Pitty's suspicions to be aroused if
Rhett refused to marry her.

Aunt Pitty prattled on happily, pleased as a child at having an
audience. Things in Atlanta were in a dreadful pass, she said, due to
the vile doings of the Republicans. There was no end to their goings on
and the worst thing was the way they were putting ideas in the poor
darkies' heads.

"My dear, they want to let the darkies vote! Did you ever hear of
anything more silly? Though—I don't know—now that I think about it,
Uncle Peter has much more sense than any Republican I ever saw and much
better manners but, of course, Uncle Peter is far too well bred to want
to vote. But the very notion has upset the darkies till they're right
addled. And some of them are so insolent. Your life isn't safe on the
streets after dark and even in the broad daylight they push ladies off
the sidewalks into the mud. And if any gentleman dares to protest, they
arrest him and— My dear, did I tell you that Captain Butler was in
jail?"

"Rhett Butler?"

Even with this startling news, Scarlett was grateful that Aunt Pitty
had saved her the necessity of bringing his name into the conversation
herself.

"Yes, indeed!" Excitement colored Pitty's cheeks pink and she sat
upright. "He's in jail this very minute for killing a negro and they
may hang him! Imagine Captain Butler hanging!"

For a moment, the breath went out of Scarlett's lungs in a sickening
gasp and she could only stare at the fat old lady who was so obviously
pleased at

=== SCENE 61 ===
is. You see, all of our Confederate funds belong to the
Yankees now—at least, the Yankees think so. But Captain Butler says he
doesn't know anything...Dr. Meade says they ought to hang him
anyhow, only hanging is too good for a thief and a profiteer— Dear,
you look so oddly! Do you feel faint? Have I upset you talking like
this? I knew he was once a beau of yours but I thought you'd fallen out
long ago. Personally, I never approved of him, for he's such a
scamp—"

"He's no friend of mine," said Scarlett with an effort. "I had a
quarrel with him during the siege, after you went to Macon. Where—
where is he?"

"In the firehouse over near the public square!"

"In the firehouse?"

Aunt Pitty crowed with laughter.

"Yes, he's in the firehouse. The Yankees use it for a military jail
now. The Yankees are camped in huts all round the city hall in the
square and the firehouse is just down the street, so that's where
Captain Butler is. And Scarlett, I heard the funniest thing yesterday
about Captain Butler. I forget who told me. You know how well groomed
he always was—really a dandy—and they've been keeping him in the
firehouse and not letting him bathe and every day he's been insisting
that he wanted a bath and finally they led him out of his cell onto the
square and there was a long horse trough where the whole regiment had
bathed in the same water! And they told him he could bathe there and he
said No, that he preferred his own brand of Southern dirt to Yankee
dirt and—"

Scarlett heard the cheerful babbling voice going on and on but she
did not hear the words. In her mind there were only two ideas, Rhett
had more money than she had even hoped and he was in jail. The fact
that he was in jail and possibly might be hanged changed the face of
matters somewhat, in fact made them look a little brighter. She had
very little feeling about Rhett being hanged. Her need of money was too
pressing, too desperate, for her to bother about his ultimate fate.
Besides, she half shared Dr. Meade's opinion that hanging was too good
for him. Any man who'd leave a woman stranded between two armies in the
middle of the night, just to go off and fight for a Cause already lost,
deserved hanging...If she could somehow manage to marry him while
he was in jail, all those millions would be hers and hers alone should
he be executed. And if marriage wa

=== SCENE 62 ===
and plant miles and miles of
cotton. And she could have pretty clothes and all she wanted to eat and
so could Suellen and Carreen. And Wade could have nourishing food to
fill out his thin cheeks and warm clothes and a governess and afterward
go to the university...and not grow up barefooted and ignorant like
a Cracker. And a good doctor could look after Pa and as for
Ashley—what couldn't she do for Ashley!

Aunt Pittypat's monologue broke off suddenly as she said
inquiringly: "Yes, Mammy?" and Scarlett, coming back from dreams, saw
Mammy standing in the doorway, her hands under her apron and in her
eyes an alert piercing look. She wondered how long Mammy had been
standing there and how much she had heard and observed. Probably
everything, to judge by the gleam in her old eyes.

"Miss Scarlett look lak she tared. Ah spec she better go ter
bed."

"I am tired," said Scarlett, rising and meeting Mammy's eyes with a
childlike, helpless look, "and I'm afraid I'm catching a cold too. Aunt
Pitty, would you mind if I stayed in bed tomorrow and didn't go calling
with you? I can go calling any time and I'm so anxious to go to Fanny's
wedding tomorrow night. And if my cold gets worse I won't be able to
go. And a day in bed would be such a lovely treat for me."

Mammy's look changed to faint worry as she felt Scarlett's hands and
looked into her face. She certainly didn't look well. The excitement of
her thoughts had abruptly ebbed, leaving her white and shaking.

"Yo' han's lak ice, honey. You come ter bed an' Ah'll brew you some
sassfrass tea an' git you a hot brick ter mek you sweat."

"How thoughtless I've been," cried the plump old lady, hopping from
her chair and patting Scarlett's arm. "Just chattering on and not
thinking of you. Honey, you shall stay in bed all tomorrow and rest up
and we can gossip together— Oh, dear, no! I can't be with you. I've
promised to sit with Mrs. Bonnell tomorrow. She is down with la grippe
and so is her cook. Mammy, I'm so glad you are here. You must go over
with me in the morning and help me."

Mammy hurried Scarlett up the dark stairs, muttering fussy remarks
about cold hands and thin shoes and Scarlett looked meek and was well
content. If she could only lull Mammy's suspicions further and get her
out of the house in the morning, all would be well. Then she could go
to the Yankee jail and see Rhett. As she climbed the stairs, the faint
rumbling of thunder began and, standing on the well-remembered landing,
she thought how like the siege cannon it sounded. She shivered.
Forever, thunder would mean cannon and war to her.

CHAPTER XXXIV

The sun shone intermittently the next morning and the hard wind that
drove dark clouds swiftly across its face rattled the windowpanes and
moaned faintly about the house. Scarlett said a brief prayer of
thanksgiving that the rain of the previous night had ceased, for she
had lain awake listening to it, knowing that it would mean the ruin of
her velvet dress and new bonnet. Now that she could catch fleeting
glimpses of the sun, her spirits soared. She could hardly remain in bed
and look languid and make croaking noises until Aunt Pitty, Mammy and
Uncle Peter were out of the house and on their way to Mrs. Bonnell's.
When, at last, the front gate banged and she was alone in the house,
except for Cookie who was singing in the kitchen, she leaped from the
bed and lifted her new clothes from the closet hooks.

Sleep had refreshed her and given her strength and from the cold
hard core at the bottom of her heart, she drew courage. There was
something about the prospect of a struggle of wits with a man—with any
man—that put her on her mettle and, after months of battling against
countless discouragements, the knowledge that she was at last facing a
definite adversary, one whom she might unhorse by her own efforts, gave
her a buoyant sensation.

Dressing unaided was difficult but she finally accomplished it and
putting on the bonnet with its rakish feathers she ran to Aunt Pitty's
room to preen herself in front of the long mirror. How pretty she
looked! The cock feathers gave her a dashing air and the dull-green
velvet of the bonnet made her eyes startlingly bright, almost emerald
colored. And the dress was incomparable, so rich and handsome looking
and yet so dignified! It was wonderful to have a lovely dress again. It
was so nice to know that she looked pretty and provocative, and she
impulsively bent forward and kissed her reflection in the mirror and
then laughed at her own foolishness. She picked up Ellen's Paisley
shawl to wrap about her but the colors of the faded old square clashed
with the moss-green dress and made her appear a little shabby. Opening
Aunt Pitty's closet she removed a black broadcloth cloak, a thin fall
garment which Pitty used only for Sunday wear, and put it on. She
slipped into her pierced ears the diamond earrings she had brought from
Tara, and tossed her head to observe the effect. They made pleasant
clicking noises which were very satisfactory and she thought that she
must remember to toss her head frequently when with Rhett. Dancing
earrings always attracted a man and gave a girl such a spirited
air.

What a shame Aunt Pitty had no other gloves than the ones now on her
fat hands! No woman could really feel like a lady without gloves, but
Scarlett had not had a pair since she left Atlanta. And the long months
of hard work at Tara had roughened her hands until they were far from
pretty. Well, it couldn't be helped. She'd take Aunt Pitty's little
seal muff and hide her bare hands in it. Scarlett felt that it gave her
the final finishing touch of elegance. No one, looking at her now,
would suspect that poverty and want were standing at her shoulder.

It was so important that Rhett should not suspect. He must not think
that anything but tender feelings were driving her.

She tiptoed down the stairs and out of the house while Cookie bawled
on unconcernedly in the kitchen. She hastened down Baker Street to
avoid the all seeing eyes of the neighbors and sat down on a carriage
block on Ivy Street in front of a burned house, to wait for some
passing carriage or wagon which would give her a ride. The sun dipped
in and out from behind hurrying clouds, lighting the street with a
false brightness which had no warmth in it, and the wind fluttered the
lace of her pantalets. It was colder than she had expected and she
wrapped Aunt Pitty's thin cloak about her and shivered impatiently.
Just as she was preparing to start walking the long way across town to
the Yankee encampment, a battered wagon appeared. In it was an old
woman with a lip full of snuff and a weather-beaten face under a drab
sunbonnet, driving a dawdling old mule. She was going in the direction
of the city hall and she grudgingly gave Scarlett a ride. But it was
obvious that the dress, bonnet and muff found no favor with her.

"She thinks I'm a hussy," thought Scarlett. "And perhaps she's right
at that!"

When at last they reached the town square and the tall white cupola
of the city hall loomed up, she made her thanks, climbed down from the
wagon and watched the country woman drive off. Looking around carefully
to see that she was not observed, she pinched her cheeks to give them
color and bit her lips until they stung to make them red. She adjusted
the bonnet and smoothed back her hair and looked about the square. The
two-story red-brick city hall had survived the burning of the city. But
it looked forlorn and unkempt under the gray sky. Surrounding the
building completely and covering the square of land of which it was the
center were row after row of army huts, dingy and mud splashed. Yankee
soldiers loitered everywhere and Scarlett looked at them uncertainly,
some of her courage deserting her. How would she go about finding Rhett
in this enemy camp?

She looked down the street toward the firehouse and saw that the
wide arched doors were closed and heavily barred and two sentries
passed and repassed on each side of the building. Rhett was in there.
But what should she say to the Yankee soldiers? And what would they say
to her? She squared her shoulders. If she hadn't been afraid to kill
one Yankee, she shouldn't fear merely talking to another.

She picked her way precariously across the stepping stones of the
muddy street and walked forward until a sentry, his blue overcoat
buttoned high against the wind, stopped her.

"What is it, Ma'm?" His voice had a strange mid-Western twang but it
was polite and respectful.

"I want to see a man in there—he is a prisoner."

"Well, I don't know," said the sentry, scratching his head. "They
are mighty particular about visitors and—" He stopped and peered into
her face sharply. "Lord, lady! Don't you cry! You go over to post
headquarters and ask the officers. They'll let you see him, I bet."

Scarlett, who had no intention of crying, beamed at him. He turned
to another sentry who was slowly pacing his beat: "Yee-ah, Bill.
Come'eer."

The second sentry, a large man muffled in a blue overcoat from which
villainous black whiskers burst, came through the mud toward them.

"You take this lady to headquarters."

Scarlett thanked him and followed the sentry.

"Mind you don't turn your ankle on those stepping stones," said the
soldier, taking her arm. "And you'd better hist up your skirts a little
to keep them out of the mud."

The voice issuing from the whiskers had the same nasal twang but was
kind and pleasant and his hand was firm and respectful. Why, Yankees
weren't bad at all!

"It's a mighty cold day for a lady to be out in," said her escort.
"Have you come a fer piece?"

"Oh, yes, from clear across the other side of town," she said,
warming to the kindness in his voice.

"This ain't no weather for a lady to be out in," said the soldier
reprovingly, "with all this la grippe in the air. Here's Post Command,
lady— What's the matter?"

"This house—this house is your headquarters?" Scarlett looked up at
the lovely old dwelling facing on the square and could have cried. She
had been to so many parties in this house during the war. It had been a
gay beautiful place and now—there was a large United States flag
floating over it.

"What's the matter?"

"Nothing—only—only—I used to know the people who lived here."

"Well, that's too bad. I guess they wouldn't know it themselves if
they saw it, for it shore is torn up on the inside. Now, you go on in,
Ma'm, and ask for the captain."

She went up the steps, caressing the broken white banisters, and
pushed open the front door. The hall was dark and as cold as a vault
and a shivering sentry was leaning against the closed folding doors of
what had been, in better days, the dining room.

"I want to see the captain," she said.

He pulled back the doors and she entered the room, her heart beating
rapidly, her face flushing with embarrassment and excitement. There was
a close stuffy smell in the room, compounded of the smoking fire,
tobacco fumes, leather, damp woolen uniforms and unwashed bodies. She
had a confused impression of bare walls with torn wallpaper, rows of
blue overcoats and slouch hats hung on nails, a roaring fire, a long
table covered with papers and a group of officers in blue uniforms with
brass buttons.

She gulped once and found her voice. She mustn't let these Yankees
know she was afraid. She must look and be her prettiest and most
unconcerned self.

"The captain?"

"I'm one captain," said a fat man whose tunic was unbuttoned.

"I want to see a prisoner, Captain Rhett Butler."

"Butler again? He's popular, that man," laughed the captain, taking
a chewed cigar from his mouth. "You a relative, Ma'm?"

"Yes—his—his sister."

He laughed again.

"He's got a lot of sisters, one of them here yesterday."

Scarlett flushed. One of those creatures Rhett consorted with,
probably that Watling woman. And these Yankees thought she was another
one. It was unendurable. Not even for Tara would she stay here another
minute and be insulted. She turned to the door and reached angrily for
the knob but another officer was by her side quickly. He was clean
shaven and young and had merry, kind eyes.

"Just a minute, Ma'm. Won't you sit down here by the fire where it's
warm? I'll go see what I can do about it. What is your name? He refused
to see the—lady who called yesterday."

She sank into the proffered chair, glaring at the discomfited fat
captain, and gave her name. The nice young officer slipped on his
overcoat and left the room and the others took themselves off to the
far end of the table where they talked in low tones and pawed at the
papers. She stretched her feet gratefully toward the fire, realizing
for the first time how cold they were and wishing she had thought to
put a piece of cardboard over the hole in the sole of one slipper.
After a time, voices murmured outside the door and she heard Rhett's
laugh. The door opened, a cold draft swept the room and Rhett appeared,
hatless, a long cape thrown carelessly across his shoulders. He was
dirty and unshaven and without a cravat but somehow jaunty despite his
dishabille, and his dark eyes were snapping joyfully at the sight of
her.

"Scarlett!"

He had her hands in both of his and, as always, there was something
hot and vital and exciting about his grip. Before she quite knew what
he was about, he had bent and kissed her cheek, his mustache tickling
her. As he felt the startled movement of her body away from him, he
hugged her about the shoulders and said: "My darling little sister!"
and grinned down at her as if he relished her helplessness in resisting
his caress. She couldn't help laughing back at him for the advantage he
had taken. What a rogue he was! Jail had not changed him one bit.

The fat captain was muttering through his cigar to the merry-eyed
officer.

"Most irregular. He should be in the firehouse. You know the
orders."

"Oh, for God's sake, Henry! The lady would freeze in that barn."

"Oh, all right, all right! It's your responsibility."

"I assure you, gentlemen," said Rhett, turning to them but still
keeping a grip on Scarlett's shoulders, "my—sister hasn't brought me
any saws or files to help me escape."

They all laughed and, as they did, Scarlett looked quickly about
her. Good Heavens, was she going to have to talk to Rhett before six
Yankee officers! Was he so dangerous a prisoner they wouldn't let him
out of their sight? Seeing her anxious glance, the nice officer pushed
open a door and spoke brief low words to two privates who had leaped to
their feet at his entrance. They picked up their rifles and went out
into the hall, closing the door behind them.

"If you wish, you may sit here in the orderly room," said the young
captain. "And don't try to bolt through that door. The men are just
outside."

"You see what a desperate character I am, Scarlett," said Rhett.
"Thank you, Captain. This is most kind of you."

He bowed carelessly and taking Scarlett's arm pulled her to her feet
and propelled her into the dingy orderly room. She was never to
remember what the room looked like except that it was small and dim and
none too warm and there were handwritten papers tacked on the mutilated
walls and chairs which had cowhide seats with the hair still on
them.

When he had closed the door behind them, Rhett came to her swiftly
and bent over her. Knowing his desire, she turned her head quickly but
smiled provocatively at him out of the corners of her eyes.

"Can't I really kiss you now?"

"On the forehead, like a good brother," she answered demurely.

"Thank you, no. I prefer to wait and hope for better things." His
eyes sought her lips and lingered there a moment. "But how good of you
to come to see me, Scarlett! You are the first respectable citizen who
has called on me since my incarceration, and being in jail makes one
appreciate friends. When did you come to town?"

"Yesterday afternoon."

"And you came out this morning? Why, my dear, you are more than
good." He smiled down at her with the first expression of honest
pleasure she had ever seen on his face. Scarlett smiled inwardly with
excitement and ducked her head as if embarrassed.

"Of course, I came out right away. Aunt Pitty told me about you last
night and I—I just couldn't sleep all night for thinking how awful it
was. Rhett, I'm so distressed!"

"Why, Scarlett!"

His voice was soft but there was a vibrant note in it, and looking
up into his dark face she saw in it none of the skepticism, the jeering
humor she knew so well. Before his direct gaze her eyes fell again in
real confusion. Things were going even better than she hoped.

"It's worth being in jail to see you again and to hear you say
things like that. I really couldn't believe my ears when they brought
me your name. You see, I never expected you to forgive me for my
patriotic conduct that night on the road near Rough and Ready. But I
take it that this call means you have forgiven me?"

She could feel swift anger stir, even at this late date, as she
thought of that night but she subdued it and tossed her head until the
earrings danced.

"No, I haven't forgiven you," she said and pouted.

"Another hope crushed. And after I offered up myself for my country
and fought barefooted in the snow at Franklin and got the finest case
of dysentery you ever heard of for my pains!"

"I don't want to hear about your—pains," she said, still pouting
but smiling at him from up-tilted eyes. "I still think you were hateful
that night and I never expect to forgive you. Leaving me alone like
that when anything might have happened to me!"

"But nothing did happen to you. So, you see, my confidence in you
was justified. I knew you'd get home safely and God help any Yankee who
got in your way!"

"Rhett, why on earth did you do such a silly thing—enlisting at the
last minute when you knew we were going to get licked? And after all
you'd said about idiots who went out and got shot!"

"Scarlett, spare me! I am always overcome with shame when I think
about it."

"Well, I'm glad to learn you are ashamed of the way you treated
me."

"You misunderstand. I regret to say that my conscience has not
troubled me at all about deserting you. But as for enlisting—when I
think of joining the army in varnished boots and a white linen suit and
armed with only a pair of dueling pistols— And those long cold miles
in the snow after my boots wore out and I had no overcoat and nothing
to eat...I cannot understand why I did not desert. It was all the
purest insanity. But it's in one's blood. Southerners can never resist
a losing cause. But never mind my reasons. It's enough that I'm
forgiven."

"You're not. I think you're a hound." But she caressed the last word
until it might have been "darling."

"Don't fib. You've forgiven me. Young ladies don't dare Yankee
sentries to see a prisoner, just for charity's sweet sake, and come all
dressed up in velvet and feathers and seal muffs too. Scarlett, how
pretty you look! Thank God, you aren't in rags or mourning! I get so
sick of women in dowdy old clothes and perpetual crepe. You look like
the Rue de la Paix. Turn around, my dear, and let me look at you."

So he had noticed the dress. Of course, he would notice such things,
being Rhett. She laughed in soft excitement and spun about on her toes,
her arms extended, her hoops tilting up to show her lace trimmed
pantalets. His black eyes took her in from bonnet to heels in a glance
that missed nothing, that old impudent unclothing glance which always
gave her goose bumps.

"You look very prosperous and very, very tidy. And almost good
enough to eat. If it wasn't for the Yankees outside—but you are quite
safe, my dear. Sit down. I won't take advantage of you as I did the
last time I saw you." He rubbed his cheek with pseudo ruefulness.
"Honestly, Scarlett, don't you think you were a bit selfish that night?
Think of all I had done for you, risked my life—stolen a horse—and
such a horse! Rushed to the defense of Our Glorious Cause! And what did
I get for my pains? Some hard words and a very hard slap in the
face."

She sat down. The conversation was not going in quite the direction
she hoped. He had seemed so nice when he first saw her, so genuinely
glad she had come. He had almost seemed like a human being and not the
perverse wretch she knew so well.

"Must you always get something for your pains?"

"Why, of course! I am a monster of selfishness, as you ought to
know. I always expect payment for anything I give."

That sent a slight chill through her but she rallied and jingled her
earbobs again.

"Oh, you really aren't so bad, Rhett. You just like to show
off."

"My word, but you have changed!" he said and laughed. "What has made
a Christian of you? I have kept up with you through Miss Pittypat but
she gave me no intimation that you had developed womanly sweetness.
Tell me more about yourself, Scarlett. What have you been doing since I
last saw you?"

The old irritation and antagonism which he roused in her was hot in
her heart and she yearned to speak tart words. But she smiled instead
and the dimple crept into her cheek. He had drawn a chair close beside
hers and she leaned over and put a gentle hand on his arm, in an
unconscious manner.

"Oh, I've been doing nicely, thank you, and everything at Tara is
fine now. Of course, we had a dreadful time right after Sherman went
through but, after all, he didn't burn the house and the darkies saved
most of the livestock by driving it into the swamp. And we cleared a
fair crop this last fall, twenty bales. Of course, that's practically
nothing compared with what Tara can do but we haven't many field hands.
Pa says, of course, we'll do better next year. But, Rhett, it's so dull
in the country now! Imagine, there aren't any balls or barbecues and
the only thing people talk about is hard times! Goodness, I get sick of
it! Finally last week I got too bored to stand it any longer, so Pa
said I must take a trip and have a good time. So I came up here to get
me some frocks made and then I'm going over to Charleston to visit my
aunt. It'll be lovely to go to balls again."

There, she thought with pride, I delivered that with just the right
airy way! Not too rich but certainly not poor.

"You look beautiful in ball dresses, my dear, and you know it too,
worse luck! I suppose the real reason you are going visiting is that
you have run through the County swains and are seeking fresh ones in
fields afar."

Scarlett had a thankful thought that Rhett had spent the last
several months abroad and had only recently come back to Atlanta.
Otherwise, he would never have made so ridiculous a statement. She
thought briefly of the County swains, the ragged embittered little
Fontaines, the poverty-stricken Munroe boys, the Jonesboro and
Fayetteville beaux who were so busy plowing, splitting rails and
nursing sick old animals that they had forgotten such things as balls
and pleasant flirtations ever existed. But she put down this memory and
giggled self-consciously as if admitting the truth of his
assertion.

"Oh, well," she said deprecatingly.

"You are a heartless creature, Scarlett, but perhaps that's part of
your charm." He smiled in his old way, one corner of his mouth curving
down, but she knew he was complimenting her. "For, of course, you know
you have more charm than the law should permit. Even I have felt it,
case-hardened though I am. I've often wondered what it was about you
that made me always remember you, for I've known many ladies who were
prettier than you and certainly more clever and, I fear, morally more
upright and kind. But, somehow, I always remembered you. Even during
the months since the surrender when I was in France and England and
hadn't seen you or heard of you and was enjoying the society of many
beautiful ladies, I always remembered you and wondered what you were
doing."

For a moment she was indignant that he should say other women were
prettier, more clever and kind than she, but that momentary flare was
wiped out in her pleasure that he had remembered her and her charm. So
he hadn't forgotten! That would make things easier. And he was behaving
so nicely, almost like a gentleman would do under the circumstances.
Now, all she had to do was bring the subject around to himself, so she
could intimate that she had not forgotten him either and then—

She gently squeezed his arm and dimpled again.

"Oh, Rhett, how you do run on, teasing a country girl like me! I
know mighty well you never gave me a thought after you left me that
night. You can't tell me you ever thought of me with all those pretty
French and English girls around you. But I didn't come all the way out
here to hear you talk foolishness about me. I came—I
came—because—"

"Because?"

"Oh, Rhett, I'm so terribly distressed about you! So frightened for
you! When will they let you out of that terrible place?"

He swiftly covered her hand with his and held it hard against his
arm.

"Your distress does you credit. There's no telling when I'll be out.
Probably when they've stretched the rope a bit more."

"The rope?"

"Yes, I expect to make my exit from here at the rope's end."

"They won't really hang you?"

"They will if they can get a little more evidence against me."

"Oh, Rhett!" she cried, her hand at her heart.

"Would you be sorry? If you are sorry enough, I'll mention you in my
will."

His dark eyes laughed at her recklessly and he squeezed her
hand.

His will! She hastily cast down her eyes for fear of betrayal but
not swiftly enough, for his eyes gleamed, suddenly curious.

"According to the Yankees, I ought to have a fine will. There seems
to be considerable interest in my finances at present. Every day, I am
hauled up before another board of inquiry and asked foolish questions.
The rumor seems current that I made off with the mythical gold of the
Confederacy."

"Well—did you?"

"What a leading question! You know as well as I do that the
Confederacy ran a printing press instead of a mint."

"Where did you get all your money? Speculating? Aunt Pittypat
said—"

"What probing questions you ask!"

Damn him! Of course, he had the money. She was so excited it became
difficult to talk sweetly to him.

"Rhett, I'm so upset about your being here. Don't you think there's
a chance of your getting out?"

"'Nihil desperandum' is my motto."

"What does that mean?"

"It means 'maybe,' my charming ignoramus."

She fluttered her thick lashes up to look at him and fluttered them
down again.

"Oh, you're too smart to let them hang you! I know you'll think of
some clever way to beat them and get out! And when you do—"

"And when I do?" he asked softly, leaning closer.

"Well, I—" and she managed a pretty confusion and a blush. The
blush was not difficult for she was breathless and her heart was
beating like a drum. "Rhett, I'm so sorry about what I—I said to you
that night—you know—at Rough and Ready. I was—oh, so very frightened
and upset and you were so—so—" She looked down and saw his brown hand
tighten over hers. "And—I thought then that I'd never, never forgive
you! But when Aunt Pitty told me yesterday that you—that they might
hang you—it came over me of a sudden and I—I—" She looked up into
his eyes with one swift imploring glance and in it she put an agony of
heartbreak. "Oh, Rhett, I'd die if they hanged you! I couldn't bear it!
You see, I—" And, because she could not longer sustain the hot leaping
light that was in his eyes, her lids fluttered down again.

In a moment I'll be crying, she thought in a frenzy of wonder and
excitement. Shall I let myself cry? Would that seem more natural?

He said quickly: "My God, Scarlett, you can't mean that you—" and
his hands closed over hers in so hard a grip that it hurt.

She shut her eyes tightly, trying to squeeze out tears, but
remembered to turn her face up slightly so he could kiss her with no
difficulty. Now, in an instant his lips would be upon hers, the hard
insistent lips which she suddenly remembered with a vividness that left
her weak. But he did not kiss her. Disappointment queerly stirring her,
she opened her eyes a trifle and ventured a peep at him. H

=== SCENE 63 ===
expression on her face. She knew that the feeling of triumph
surging through her was certain to be plain in her eyes. In a moment he
would ask her to marry him—or at least say that he loved her and then...As
she watched him through the veil of her lashes he turned her
hand over, palm up, to kiss it too, and suddenly he drew a quick
breath. Looking down she saw her own palm, saw it as it really was for
the first time in a year, and a cold sinking fear gripped her. This was
a stranger's palm, not Scarlett O'Hara's soft, white, dimpled, helpless
one. This hand was rough from work, brown with sunburn, splotched with
freckles. The nails were broken and irregular, there were heavy
calluses on the cushions of the palm, a half-healed blister on the
thumb. The red scar which boiling fat had left last month was ugly and
glaring. She looked at it in horror and, before she thought, she
swiftly clenched her fist.

Still he did not raise his head. Still she could not see his face.
He pried her fist open inexorably and stared at it, picked up her other
hand and held them both together silently, looking down at them.

"Look at me," he said finally raising his head, and his voice was
very quiet. "And drop that demure expression."

Unwillingly she met his eyes, defiance and perturbation on her face.
His black brows were up and his eyes gleamed.

"So you have been doing very nicely at Tara, have you? Cleared so
much money on the cotton you can go visiting. What have you been doing
with your hands—plowing?"

She tried to wrench them away but he held them hard, running his
thumbs over the calluses.

"These are not the hands of a lady," he said and tossed them into
her lap.

"Oh, shut up!" she cried, feeling a momentary intense relief at
being able to speak her feelings. "Whose business is it what I do with
my hands?"

What a fool I am, she thought vehemently. I should have borrowed or
stolen Aunt Pitty's gloves. But I didn't realize my hands looked so
bad. Of course, he would notice them. And now I've lost my temper and
probably ruined everything. Oh, to have this happen when he was right
at the point of a declaration!

"Your hands are certainly no business of mine," said Rhett coolly
and lounged back in his chair indolently, his face a smooth blank.

So he was going to be difficult. Well, she'd have to bear it meekly,
much as she disliked it, if she expected to snatch victory from this
debacle. Perhaps if she sweet-talked him—

"I think you're real rude to throw off on my poor hands. Just
because I went riding last week without my gloves and ruined
them—"

"Riding, hell!" he said in the same level voice. "You've been
working with those hands, working like a nigger. What's the answer? Why
did you lie to me about everything being nice at Tara?"

"Now, Rhett—"

"Suppose we get down to the truth. What is the real purpose of your
visit? Almost, I was persuaded by your coquettish airs that you cared
something about me and were sorry for me."

"Oh, I am sorry! Indeed—"

"No, you aren't. They can hang me higher than Haman for all you
care. It's written as plainly on your face as hard work is written on
your hands. You wanted something from me and you wanted it badly enough
to put on quite a show. Why didn't you come out in the open and tell me
what it was? You'd have stood a much better chance of getting it, for
if there's one virtue I value in women it's frankness. But no, you had
to come jingling your earbobs and pouting and frisking like a
prostitute with a prospective client."

He did not raise his voice at the last words or emphasize them in
any way but to Scarlett they cracked like a whiplash, and with despair
she saw the end of her hopes of getting him to propose marriage. Had he
exploded with rage and injured vanity or upbraided her, as other men
would have done, she could have handled him. But the deadly quietness
of his voice frightened her, left her utterly at a loss as to her next
move. Although he was a prisoner and the Yankees were in the next room,
it came to her suddenly that Rhett Butler was a dangerous man to run
afoul of.

"I suppose my memory is getting faulty. I should have recalled that
you are just like me and that you never do anything without an ulterior
motive. Now, let me see. What could you have had up your sleeve, Mrs.
Hamilton? It isn't possible that you were so misguided as to think I
would propose matrimony?"

Her face went crimson and she did not answer.

"But you can't have forgotten my oft-repeated remark that I am not a
marrying man?"

When she did not speak, he said with sudden violence:

"You hadn't forgotten? Answer me."

"I hadn't forgotten," she said wretchedly.

"What a gambler you are, Scarlett," he jeered. "You took a chance
that my incarceration away from female companionship would put me in
such a state I'd snap at you like a trout at a worm."

And that's what you did, thought Scarlett with inward rage, and if
it hadn't been for my hands—

"Now, we have most of the truth, everything except your reason. See
if you can tell me the truth about why you wanted to lead me into
wedlock."

There was a suave, almost teasing note in his voice and she took
heart. Perhaps everything wasn't lost, after all. Of course, she had
ruined any hope of marriage but, even in her despair, she was glad.
There was something about this immobile man which frightened her, so
that now the thought of marrying him was fearful. But perhaps if she
was clever and played on his sympathies and his memories, she could
secure a loan. She pulled her face into a placating and childlike
expression.

"Oh, Rhett, you can help me so much—if you'll just be sweet."

"There's nothing I like better than being—sweet."

"Rhett, for old friendship's sake, I want you to do me a favor."

"So, at last the horny-handed lady comes to her real mission. I
feared that 'visiting the sick and the imprisoned' was not your proper
role. What do you want? Money?"

The bluntness of his question ruined all hopes of leading up to the
matter in any circuitous and sentimental way.

"Don't be mean, Rhett," she coaxed. "I do want some money. I want
you to lend me three hundred dollars."

"The truth at last. Talking love and thinking money. How truly
feminine! Do you need the money badly?"

"Oh, ye— Well, not so terribly but I could use it."

"Three hundred dollars. That's a vast amount of money. What do you
want it for?"

"To pay taxes on Tara."

"So you want to borrow some money. Well, since you're so
businesslike, I'll be businesslike too. What collateral will you give
me?"

"What what?"

"Collateral. Security on my investment. Of course, I don't want to
lose all that money." His voice was deceptively smooth, almost silky,
but she did not notice. Maybe everything would turn out nicely after
all.

"My earrings."

"I'm not interested in earrings."

"I'll give you a mortgage on Tara."

"Now just what would I do with a farm?"

"Well, you could—you could—it's a good plantation. And you
wouldn't lose. I'd pay you back out of next year's cotton."

"I'm not so sure." He tilted back in his chair and stuck his hands
in his pockets. "Cotton prices are dropping. Times are so hard and
money's so tight."

"Oh, Rhett, you are teasing me! You know you have millions!"

There was a warm dancing malice in his eyes as he surveyed her.

"So everything is going nicely and you don't need the money very
badly. Well, I'm glad to hear that. I like to know that all is well
with old friends."

"Oh, Rhett, for God's sake..." she began desperately, her courage
and control breaking.

"Do lower your voice. You don't want the Yankees to hear you, I
hope. Did anyone ever tell you you had eyes like a cat—a cat in the
dark?"

"Rhett, don't! I'll tell you everything. I do need the money so
badly. I—I lied about everything being all right. Everything's as
wrong as it could be. Father is—is—he's not himself. He's been queer
ever since Mother died and he can't help me any. He's just like a
child. And we haven't a single field hand to work the cotton and
there's so many to feed, thirteen of us. And the taxes— they are so
high. Rhett, I'll tell you everything. For over a year we've been just
this side of starvation. Oh, you don't know! You can't know! We've
never had enough to eat and it's terrible to wake up hungry and go to
sleep hungry. And we haven't any warm clothes and the children are
always cold and sick and—"

"Where did you get the pretty dress?"

"It's made out of Mother's curtains," she answered, too desperate to
lie about this shame. "I could stand being hungry and cold but now—now
the Carpetbaggers have raised our taxes. And the money's got to be paid
right away. And I haven't any money except one five-dollar gold piece.
I've got to have money for the taxes! Don't you see? If I don't pay
them, I'll—we'll lose Tara and we just can't lose it! I can't let it
go!"

"Why didn't you tell me all this at first instead of preying on my
susceptible heart—always weak where pretty ladies are concerned? No,
Scarlett, don't cry. You've tried every trick except that one and I
don't think I could stand it. My feelings are already lacerated with
disappointment at discovering it was my money and not my charming self
you wanted."

She remembered that he frequently told bald truths about himself
when he spoke mockingly—mocking himself as well as others, and she
hastily looked up at him. Were his feelings really hurt? Did he really
care about her? Had he been on the verge of a proposal when he saw her
palms? Or had he only been leading up to another such odious proposal
as he had made twice before? If he really cared about her, perhaps she
could smooth him down. But his black eyes raked her in no lover-like
way and he was laughing softly.

"I don't like your collateral. I'm no planter. What else have you to
offer?"

Well, she had come to it at last. Now for it! She drew a deep breath
and met his eyes squarely, all coquetry and airs gone as her spirit
rushed out to grapple that which she feared most.

"I—I have myself."

"Yes?"

Her jaw line tightened to squareness and her eyes went emerald.

"You remember that night on Aunt Pitty's porch, during the siege?
You said—you said then that you wanted me."

He leaned back carelessly in his chair and looked into her tense
face and his own dark face was inscrutable. Something flickered behind
his eyes but he said nothing.

"You said—you said you'd never wanted a woman as much as you wanted
me. If you still want me, you can have me. Rhett, I'll do anything you
say but, for God's sake, write me a draft for the money! My word's
good. I swear it. I won't go back on it. I'll put it in writing if you
like."

He looked at her oddly, still inscrutable and as she hurried on she
could not tell if he were amused or repelled. If he would only say
something, anything! She felt her cheeks getting hot.

"I have got to have the money soon, Rhett. They'll turn us out in
the road and that damned overseer of Father's will own the place
and—"

"Just a minute. What makes you think I still want you? What makes
you think you are worth three hundred dollars? Most women don't come
that high."

She blushed to her hair line and her humiliation was complete.

"Why are you doing this? Why not let the farm go and live at Miss
Pittypat's. You own half that house."

"Name of God!" she cried. "Are you a fool? I can't let Tara go. It's
home. I won't let it go. Not while I've got breath left in me!"

"The Irish," said he, lowering his chair back to level and removing
his hands from his pockets, "are the damnedest race. They put so much
emphasis on so many wrong things. Land, for instance. And every bit of
earth is just like every other bit. Now, let me get this straight,
Scarlett. You are coming to me with a business proposition. I'll give
you three hundred dollars and you'll become my mistress."

"Yes."

Now that the repulsive word had been said, she felt somehow easier
and hope awoke in her again. He had said "I'll give you." There was a
diabolic gleam in his eyes as if something amused him greatly.

"And yet, when I had the effrontery to make you this same
proposition, you turned me out of the house. And also you called me a
number of very hard names and mentioned in passing that you didn't want
a 'passel of brats.' No, my dear, I'm not rubbing it in. I'm only
wondering at the peculiarities of your mind. You wouldn't do it for
your own pleasure but you will to keep the wolf away from the door. It
proves my point that all virtue is merely a matter of prices."

"Oh, Rhett, how you run on! If you want to insult me, go on and do
it but give me the money."

She was breathing easier now. Being what he was, Rhett would
naturally want to torment and insult her as much as possible to pay her
back for past slights and for her recent attempted trickery. Well, she
could stand it. She could stand anything. Tara was worth it all. For a
brief moment it was mid-summer and the afternoon skies were blue and
she lay drowsily in the thick clover of Tara's lawn, looking up at the
billowing cloud castles, the fragrance of white blossoms in her nose
and the pleasant busy humming of bees in her ears. Afternoon and hush
and the far-off sound of the wagons coming in from the spiraling red
fields. Worth it all, worth more.

Her head went up.

"Are you going to give me the money?"

He looked as if he were enjoying himself and when he spoke there was
suave brutality in his voice.

"No, I'm not," he said.

For a moment her mind could not adjust itself to his words.

"I couldn't give it to you, even if I wanted to. I haven't a cent on
me. Not a dollar in Atlanta. I have some money, yes, but not here. And
I'm not saying where it is or how much. But if I tried to draw a draft
on it, the Yankees would be on me like a duck on a June bug and then
neither of us would get it. What do you think of that?"

Her face went an ugly green, freckles suddenly standing out across
her nose and her contorted mouth was like Gerald's in a killing rage.
She sprang to her feet with an incoherent cry which made the hum of
voices in the next room cease suddenly. Swift as a panther, Rhett was
beside her, his heavy hand across her mouth, his arm tight about her
waist. She struggled against him madly, trying to bite his hand, to
kick his legs, to scream her rage, despair, hate, her agony of broken
pride. She bent and twisted every way against the iron of his arm, her
heart near bursting, her tight stays cutting off her breath. He held
her so tightly, so roughly that it hurt and the hand over her mouth
pinched into her jaws cruelly. His face was white under its tan, his
eyes h

=== SCENE 64 ===
could feel her wet
petticoat and pantalets cold about her ankles, but she was beyond
caring about the wreck of the costume on which she had gambled so much.
She was chilled and disheartened and desperate.

How could she ever go back to Tara and face them after her brave
words? How could she tell them they must all go—somewhere? How could
she leave it all, the red fields, the tall pines, the dark swampy
bottom lands, the quiet burying ground where Ellen lay in the cedars'
deep shade?

Hatred of Rhett burned in her heart as she plodded along the
slippery way. What a blackguard he was! She hoped they did hang him, so
she would never have to face him again with his knowledge of her
disgrace and her humiliation. Of course, he could have gotten the money
for her if he'd wanted to get it. Oh, hanging was too good for him!
Thank God, he couldn't see her now, with her clothes soaking wet and
her hair straggling and her teeth chattering. How hideous she must look
and how he would laugh!

The negroes she passed turned insolent grins at her and laughed
among themselves as she hurried by, slipping and sliding in the mud,
stopping, panting to replace her slippers. How dared they laugh, the
black apes! How dared they grin at her, Scarlett O'Hara of Tara! She'd
like to have them all whipped until the blood ran down their backs.
What devils the Yankees were to set them free, free to jeer at white
people!

As she walked down Washington Street, the landscape was as dreary as
her own heart. Here there was none of the bustle and cheerfulness which
she had noted on Peachtree Street. Here many handsome homes had once
stood, but few of them had been rebuilt. Smoked foundations and the
lonesone blackened chimneys, now known as "Sherman's Sentinels,"
appeared with disheartening frequency. Overgrown paths led to what had
been houses—old lawns thick with dead weeds, carriage blocks bearing
names she knew so well, hitching posts which would never again know the
knot of reins. Cold wind and rain, mud and bare trees, silence and
desolation. How wet her feet were and how long the journey home!

She heard the splash of hooves behind her and moved farther over on
the narrow sidewalk to avoid more mud splotches on Aunt Pittypat's
cloak. A horse and buggy came slowly up the road and she turned to
watch it, determined to beg a ride if the driver was a white person.
The rain obscured her vision as the buggy came abreast, but she saw the
driver peer over the tarpaulin that stretched from the dashboard to his
chin. There was something familiar about his face and as she stepped
out into the road to get a closer view, there was an embarrassed little
cough from the man and a well-known voice cried in accents of pleasure
and astonishment: "Surely, it can't be Miss Scarlett!"

"Oh, Mr. Kennedy!" she cried, splashing across the road and leaning
on the muddy wheel, heedless of further damage to the cloak. "I was
never so glad to see anybody in my life!"

He colored with pleasure at the obvious sincerity of her words,
hastily squirted a stream of tobacco juice from the opposite side of
the buggy and leaped spryly to the ground. He shook her hand
enthusiastically and holding up the tarpaulin, assisted her into the
buggy.

"Miss Scarlett, what are you doing over in this section by yourself?
Don't you know it's dangerous these days? And you are soaking wet.
Here, wrap the robe around your feet."

As he fussed over her, clucking like a hen, she gave herself up to
the luxury of being taken care of. It was nice to have a man fussing
and clucking and scolding, even if it was only that old maid in pants,
Frank Kennedy. It was especially soothing after Rhett's brutal
treatment. And oh, how good to see a County face when she was so far
from home! He was well dressed, she noticed, and the buggy was new too.
The horse looked young and well fed, but Frank looked far older than
his years, older than on that Christmas eve when he had been at Tara
with his men. He was thin and sallow faced and his yellow eyes were
watery and sunken in creases of loose flesh. His ginger-colored beard
was scantier than ever, streaked with tobacco juice and as ragged as

=== SCENE 65 ===
I know I'm a goose about business but I'm so interested! Please
tell me all about it and you can explain what I don't understand."

"Well, my other iron is a sawmill."

"A what?"

"A mill to cut up lumber and plane it. I haven't bought it yet but
I'm going to. There's a man named Johnson who has one, way out
Peachtree road, and he's anxious to sell it. He needs some cash right
away, so he wants to sell and stay and run it for me at a weekly wage.
It's one of the few mills in this section, Miss Scarlett. The Yankees
destroyed most of them. And anyone who owns a sawmill owns a gold mine,
for nowadays you can ask your own price for lumber. The Yankees burned
so many houses here and there aren't enough for people to live in and
it looks like folks have gone crazy about rebuilding. They can't get
enough lumber and they can't get it fast enough. People are just
pouring into Atlanta now, all the folks from the country districts who
can't make a go of farming without darkies and the Yankees and
Carpetbaggers who are swarming in trying to pick our bones a little
barer than they already are. I tell you Atlanta's going to be a big
town soon. They've got to have lumber for their houses, so I'm going to
buy this mill just as soon as—well, as soon as some of the bills owing
me are paid. By this time next year, I ought to be breathing easier
about money. I—I guess you know why I'm so anxious to make money
quickly, don't you?"

He blushed and cackled again. He's thinking of Suellen, Scarlett
thought in disgust.

For a moment she considered asking him to lend her three hundred
dollars, but wearily she rejected the idea. He would be embarrassed; he
would stammer; he would offer excuses, but he wouldn't lend it to her.
He had worked hard for it, so he could marry Suellen in the spring and
if he parted with it, his wedding would be postponed indefinitely. Even
if she worked on his sympathies and his duty toward his future family
and gained his promise of a loan, she knew Suellen would never permit
it. Suellen was getting more and more worried over the fact that she
was practically an old maid and she would move heaven and earth to
prevent anything from delaying her marriage.

What was there in that whining complaining girl to make this old
fool so anxious to give her a soft nest? Suellen didn't deserve a
loving husband and the profits of a store and a sawmill. The minute Sue
got her hands on a little money she'd give herself unendurable airs and
never contribute one cent toward the upkeep of Tara. Not Suellen! She'd
think herself well out of it and not care if Tara went for taxes or
burned to the ground, so long as she had pretty clothes and a "Mrs." in
front of her name.

As Scarlett thought of Suellen's secure future and the precarious
one of herself and Tara, anger flamed in her at the unfairness of life.
Hastily she looked out of the buggy into the muddy street, lest Frank
should see her expression. She was going to lose everything she had,
while Sue— Suddenly a determination was born in her.

Suellen should not have Frank and his store and his mill!

Suellen didn't deserve them. She was going to have them herself. She
thought of Tara and remembered Jonas Wilkerson, venomous as a rattler,
at the foot of the front steps, and she grasped at the last straw
floating above the shipwreck of her life. Rhett had failed her but the
Lord had provided Frank.

But can I get him? Her fingers clenched as she looked unseeingly
into the rain. Can I make him forget Sue and propose to me real quick?
If I could make Rhett almost propose, I know I could get Frank! Her
eyes went over him, her lids flickering. Certainly, he's no beauty, she
thought coolly, and he's got very bad teeth and his breath smells bad
and he's old enough to be my father. Moreover, he's nervous and timid
and well meaning, and I don't know of any more damning qualities a man
can have. But at least, he's a gentleman and I believe I could stand
living with him better than with Rhett. Certainly I could manage him
easier. At any rate, beggars can't be choosers.

That he was Suellen's fiance caused her no qualm of conscience.
After the complete moral collapse which had sent her to Atlanta and to
Rhett, the appropriation of her sister's betrothed seemed a minor
affair and one not to be bothered with at this time.

With the rousing of fresh hope, her spine stiffened and she forgot
that her feet were wet and cold. She looked at Frank so steadily, her
eyes narrowing, that he became somewhat alarmed and she dropped her
gaze swiftly, remembering Rhett's words: "I've seen eyes like yours
above a dueling pistol...They evoke no ardor in the male
breast."

"What's the matter, Miss Scarlett? You got a chill?"

"Yes," she answered helplessly. "Would you mind—" She hesitated
timidly. "Would you mind if I put my hand in your coat pocket? It's so
cold and my muff is soaked through."

"Why—why—of course not! And you haven't any gloves! My, my, what a
brute I've been idling along like this, talking my head off when you
must be freezing and wanting to get to a fire. Giddap, Sally! By the
way, Miss Scarlett, I've been so busy talking about myself I haven't
even asked you what you were doing in this section in this
weather?"

"I was at the Yankee headquarters," she answered before she thought.
His sandy brows went up in astonishment.

"But Miss Scarlett! The soldiers— Why—"

"Mary, Mother of God, let me think of a real good lie," she prayed
hastily. It would never do for Frank to suspect she had seen Rhett.
Frank thought Rhett the blackest of blackguards and unsafe for decent
women to speak to.

"I went there—I went there to see if—if any of the officers would
buy fancy work from me to send home to their wives. I embroider very
nicely."

He sank back against the seat aghast, indignation struggling with
bewilderment.

"You went to the Yankees— But Miss Scarlett! You shouldn't.
Why—why...Surely your father doesn't know! Surely, Miss
Pittypat—"

"Oh, I shall die if you tell Aunt Pittypat!" she cried in real
anxiety

=== SCENE 66 ===
my, his eyes straying to the slender,
indomitable form of his new mother-in-law. "The only reason we lasted
as long as we did was because of the ladies behind us who wouldn't give
up."

"Who'll NEVER give up," amended Hugh, and his smile was proud but a
little wry. "There's not a lady here tonight who has surrendered, no
matter what her men folks did at Appomattox. It's a lot worse on them
than it ever was on us. At least, we took it out in fighting."

"And they in hating," finished Tommy. "Eh, Scarlett? It bothers the
ladies to see what their men folks have come down to lots more than it
bothers us. Hugh was to be a judge, Rene was to play the fiddle before
the crowned heads of Europe—" He ducked as Rene aimed a blow at him.
"And I was to be a doctor and now—"

"Geeve us ze time!" cried Rene. "Zen I become ze Pie Prince of ze
South! And my good Hugh ze King of ze Kindling and you, my Tommy, you
weel own ze Irish slaves instead of ze darky slaves. What changes—what
fun! And what eet do for you, Mees Scarlett, and Mees Melly? You meelk
ze cow, peek ze cotton?"

"Indeed, no!" said Scarlett coolly, unable to understand Rene's gay
acceptance of hardships. "Our darkies do that."

"Mees Melly, I hear she call her boy 'Beauregard.' You tell her I,
Rene, approve and say that except for 'Jesus' there is no bettaire
name."

And though he smiled, his eyes glowed proudly at the name of
Louisiana's dashing hero.

"Well, there's 'Robert Edward Lee,'" observed Tommy. "And while I'm
not trying to lessen Old Beau's reputation, my first son is going to be
named 'Bob Lee Wellburn.'"

Rene laughed and shrugged.

"I recount to you a joke but eet eez a true story. And you see how
Creoles zink of our brave Beauregard and of your General Lee. On ze
train near New Orleans a man of Virginia, a man of General Lee, he meet
wiz a Creole of ze troops of Beauregard. And ze man of Virginia, he
talk, talk, talk how General Lee do zis, General Lee say zat. And ze
Creole, he look polite and he wreenkle hees forehead lak he try to
remembaire, and zen he smile and say: 'General Lee! Ah, oui! Now I
know! General Lee! Ze man General Beauregard speak well of!'"

Scarlett tried to join politely in the laughter but she did not see
any point to the story except that Creoles were just as stuck up as
Charleston and Savannah people. Moreover, she had always thought
Ashley's son should have been named after him.

The musicians after preliminary tunings and whangings broke into
"Old Dan Tucker" and Tommy turned to her.

"Will you dance, Scarlett? I can't favor you but Hugh or Rene—"

"No, thank you. I'm still mourning my mother," said Scarlett
hastily. "I will sit them out."

Her eyes singled out Frank Kennedy and beckoned him from the side of
Mrs. Elsing.

"I'll sit in that alcove yonder if you'll bring me some refreshments
and then we can have a nice chat," she told Frank as the other three
men moved off.

When he had hurried away to bring her a glass of wine and a paper
thin slice of cake, Scarlett sat down in the alcove at the end of the
drawing room and carefully arranged her skirts so that the worst spots
would not show. The humiliating events of the morning with Rhett were
pushed from her mind by the excitement of seeing so many people and
hearing music again. Tomorrow she would think of Rhett's conduct and
her shame and they would make her writhe again. Tomorrow she would
wonder if she had made any impression on Frank's hurt and bewildered
heart. But not tonight. Tonight she was alive to her finger tips, every
sense alert with hope, her eyes sparkling.

She looked from the alcove into the huge drawing room and watched
the dancers, remembering how beautiful this room had been when first
she came to Atlanta during the war. Then the hardwood floors had shone
like glass, and overhe

=== SCENE 67 ===
ke herself believe it now.

All her life she had heard sneers hurled at the Yankees because
their pretensions to gentility were based on wealth, not breeding. But
at this moment, heresy though it was, she could not help thinking the
Yankees were right on this one matter, even if wrong in all others. It
took money to be a lady. She knew Ellen would have fainted had she ever
heard such words from her daughter. No depth of poverty could ever have
made Ellen feel ashamed. Ashamed! Yes, that was how Scarlett felt.
Ashamed that she was poor and reduced to galling shifts and penury and
work that negroes should do.

She shrugged in irritation. Perhaps these people were right and she
was wrong but, just the same, these proud fools weren't looking forward
as she was doing, straining every nerve, risking even honor and good
name to get back what they had lost. It was beneath the dignity of any
of them to indulge in a scramble for money. The times were rude and
hard. They called for rude and hard struggle if one was to conquer
them. Scarlett knew that family tradition would forcibly restrain many
of these people from such a struggle— with the making of money
admittedly its aim. They all thought that obvious money-making and even
talk of money were vulgar in the extreme. Of course, there were
exceptions. Mrs. Merriwether and her baking and Rene driving the pie
wagon. And Hugh Elsing cutting and peddling firewood and Tommy
contracting. And Frank having the gumption to start a store. But what
of the rank and file of them? The planters would scratch a few acres
and live in poverty. The lawyers and doctors would go back to their
professions and wait for clients who might never come. And the rest,
those who had lived in leisure on their incomes? What would happen to
them?

But she wasn't going to be poor all her life. She wasn't going to
sit down and patiently wait for a miracle to help her. She was going to
rush into life and wrest from it what she could. Her father had started
as a poor immigrant boy and had won the broad acres of Tara. What he
had done, his daughter could do. She wasn't like these people who had
gambled everything on a Cause that was gone and were content to be
proud of having lost that Cause, because it was worth any sacrifice.
They drew their courage from the past. She was drawing hers from the
future. Frank Kennedy, at present, was her future. At least, he had the
store and he had cash money. And if she could only marry him and get
her hands on that money, she could make ends meet at Tara for another
year. And after that—Frank must buy the sawmill. She could see for
herself how quickly the town was rebuilding and anyone who could
establish a lumber business now, when there was so little competition,
would have a gold mine.

There came to her, from the recesses of her mind, words Rhett had
spoken in the early years of the war about the money he made in the
blockade. She had not taken the trouble to understand them then, but
now they seemed perfectly clear and she wondered if it had been only
her youth or plain stupidity which had kept her from appreciating
them.

"There's just as much money to be made in the wreck of a
civilization as in the upbuilding of one."

"This is the wreck he foresaw," she thought, "and he was right.
There's still plenty of money to be made by an

=== SCENE 68 ===
oved her
skirts for him to sit by her and waved her handkerchief idly so that
the faint sweet smell of the cologne could reach his nose. She was
proud of the cologne, for no other woman in the room was wearing any
and Frank had noticed it. In a fit of daring he had whispered to her
that she was as pink and fragrant as a rose.

If only he were not so shy! He reminded her of a timid old brown
field rabbit. If only he had the gallantry and ardor of the Tarleton
boys or even the coarse impudence of Rhett Butler. But, if he possessed
those qualities, he'd probably have sense enough to feel the
desperation that lurked just beneath her demurely fluttering eyelids.
As it was, he didn't know enough about women even to suspect what she
was up to. That was her good fortune but it did not increase her
respect for him.

CHAPTER XXXVI

She married Frank Kennedy two weeks later after a whirlwind
courtship which she blushingly told him left her too breathless to
oppose his ardor any longer.

He did not know that during those two weeks she had walked the floor
at night, gritting her teeth at the slowness with which he took hints
and encouragements, praying that no untimely letter from Suellen would
reach him and ruin her plans. She thanked God that her sister was the
poorest of correspondents, delighting to receive letters and disliking
to write them. But there was always a chance, always a chance, she
thought in the long night hours as she padded back and forth across the
cold floor of her bedroom, with Ellen's faded shawl clutched about her
nightdress. Frank did not know she had received a laconic letter from
Will, relating that Jonas Wilkerson had paid another call at Tara and,
finding her gone to Atlanta, had stormed about until Will and Ashley
threw him bodily off the place. Will's letter hammered into her mind
the fact she knew only too well—that time was getting shorter and
shorter before the extra taxes must be paid. A fierce desperation drove
her as she saw the days slipping by and she wished she might grasp the
hourglass in her hands and keep the sands from running.

But so well did she conceal her feelings, so well did she enact her
role, Frank suspected nothing, saw no more than what lay on the
surface—the pretty and helpless young widow of Charles Hamilton who
greeted him every night in Miss Pittypat's parlor and listened,
breathless with admiration, as he told of future plans for his store
and how much money he expected to make when he was able to buy the
sawmill. Her sweet sympathy and her bright-eyed interest in every word
he uttered were balm upon the wound left by Suellen's supposed
defection. His heart was sore and bewildered at Suellen's conduct and
his vanity, the shy, touchy vanity of a middle-aged bachelor who knows
himself to be unattractive to women, was deeply wounded. He could not
write Suellen, upbraiding her for her faithlessness; he shrank from the
very idea. But he could ease his heart by talking about her to
Scarlett. Without saying a disloyal word about Suellen, she could tell
him she understood how badly her sister had treated him and what good
treatment he merited from a woman who really appreciated him.

Little Mrs. Hamilton was such a pretty pink-cheeked person,
alternating between melancholy sighs when she thought of her sad
plight, and laughter as gay and sweet as the tinkling of tiny silver
bells when he made small jokes to cheer her. Her green gown, now neatly
cleaned by Mammy, showed off h

=== SCENE 69 ===
poor for friendship's sake but I'm not. Frank will
never get anywhere if he doesn't get up some gumption. And he's got to
get somewhere! He's got to make money, even if I've got to wear the
pants in the family to make him do.

She was writing busily, her face screwed up with the effort, her
tongue clamped between her teeth, when the front door opened and a
great draft of cold wind swept the store. A tall man came into the
dingy room walking with a light Indian-like tread, and looking up she
saw Rhett Butler.

He was resplendent in new clothes and a greatcoat with a dashing
cape thrown back from his heavy shoulders. His tall hat was off in a
deep bow when her eyes met his and his hand went to the bosom of a
spotless pleated shirt. His white teeth gleamed startlingly against his
brown face and his bold eyes raked her.

"My dear Mrs. Kennedy," he said, walking toward her. "My very dear
Mrs. Kennedy!" and he broke into a loud merry laugh.

At first she was as startled as if a ghost had invaded the store and
then, hastily removing her foot from beneath her, she stiffened her
spine and gave him a cold stare.

"What are you doing here?"

"I called on Miss Pittypat and learned of your marriage and so I
hastened here to congratulate you."

The memory of her humiliation at his hands made her go crimson with
shame.

"I don't see how you have the gall to face me!" she cried.

"On the contrary! How have you the gall to face me?"

"Oh, you are the most—"

"Shall we let the bugles sing truce?" he smiled down at her, a wide
flashing smile that had impudence in it but no shame for his own
actions or condemnation for hers. In spite of herself, she had to smile
too, but it was a wry, uncomfortable smile.

"What a pity they didn't hang you!"

"Others share your feeling, I fear. Come, Scarlett, relax. You look
like you'd swallowed a ramrod and it isn't becoming. Surely, you've had
time to recover from my—er—my little joke."

"Joke? Ha! I'll never get over it!"

"Oh, yes, you will. You are just putting on this indignant front
because you think it's proper and respectable. May I sit down?"

"No."

He sank into a chair beside her and grinned.

"I hear you couldn't even wait two weeks for me," he said and gave a
mock sigh. "How fickle is woman!"

When she did not reply he continued.

"Tell me, Scarlett, just between friends—between very old and very
intimate friends—wouldn't it have been wiser to wait until I got out
of jail? Or are the charms of wedlock with old Frank Kennedy more
alluring than illicit relations with me?"

As always when his mockery aroused wrath within her, wrath fought
with laughter at his impudence.

"Don't be absurd."

"And would you mind satisfying my curiosity on one point which has
bothered me for some time? Did you have no womanly repugnance, no
delicate shrinking from marrying not just one man but two for whom you
had no love or even affection? Or have I been misinformed about the
delicacy of our Southern womanhood?"

"Rhett!"

"I have my answer. I always felt that women had a hardness and
endurance unknown to men, despite the pretty idea taught me in
childhood that women are frail, tender, sensitive creatures. But after
all, according to the Continental code of etiquette, it's very bad form
for husband and wife to love each other. Very bad taste, indeed. I
always felt that the Europeans had the right idea in that matter. Marry
for convenience and love for pleasure. A sensible system, don't you
think? You are closer to the old country than I thought."

How pleasant it would be to shout at him: "I did not marry for
convenience!" But unfortunately, Rhett had her there and any protest of
injured innocence would only bring more barbed remarks from him.

"How you do run on," she said coolly. Anxious to change the subject,
she asked: "How did you ever get out of jail?"

"Oh, that!" he answered, making an airy gesture. "Not much trouble.
They let me out this morning. I employed a delicate system of blackmail
on a friend in Washington who is quite high in the councils of the
Federal government. A splendid fellow—one of the staunch Union
patriots from whom I used to buy muskets and hoop skirts for the
Confederacy. When my distressing predicament was brought to his
attention in the right way, he hastened to use his influence, and so I
was released. Influence is everything, and guilt or innocence merely an
academic question."

"I'll take oath you weren't innocent."

"No, now that I am free of the toils, I'll frankly admit that I'm as
guilty as Cain. I did kill the nigger. He was uppity to a lady, and
what else could a Southern gentleman do? And while I'm confessing, I
must admit that I shot a Yankee cavalryman after some words in a
barroom. I was not charged with that peccadillo, so perhaps some other
poor devil has been hanged for it, long since."

He was so blithe about his murders her blood chilled. Words of moral
indignation rose to her lips but suddenly she remembered the Yankee who
lay under the tangle of scuppernong vines at Tara. He had not been on
her conscience any more than a roach upon which she might have stepped.
She could not sit in judgment on Rhett when she was as guilty as
he.

"And, as I seem to be making a clean breast of it, I must tell you,
in strictest confidence (that means, don't tell Miss Pittypat!) that I
did have the money, safe in a bank in Liverpool."

"The money?"

"Yes, the money the Yankees were so curious about. Scarlett, it
wasn't altogether meanness that kept me from giving you the money you
wanted. If I'd drawn a draft they could have traced it somehow and I
doubt if you'd have gotten a cent. My only hope lay in doing nothing. I
knew the money was pretty safe, for if worst came to worst, if they had
located it and tried to take it away from me, I would have named every
Yankee patriot who sold me bullets and machinery during the war. Then
there would have been a stink, for some of them are high up in
Washington now. In fact, it was my threat to unbosom my conscience
about them that got me out of jail. I—"

"Do you mean you—you actually have the Confederate gold?"

"Not all of it. Good Heavens, no! There must be fifty or more ex-
blockaders who have plenty salted away in Nassau and England and
Canada. We will be pretty unpopular with the Confederates who weren't
as slick as we were. I have got close to half a million. Just think,
Scarlett, a half-million dollars, if you'd only restrained your fiery
nature and not rushed into wedlock again!"

A half-million dollars. She felt a pang of almost physical sickness
at the thought of so much money. His jeering words passed over her head
and she did not even hear them. It was hard to believe there was so
much money in all this bitter and poverty- stricken world. So much
money, so very much money, and someone else had it, someone who took it
lightly and didn't need it. And she had only a sick elderly husband and
this dirty, piddling, little store between her and a hostile world. It
wasn't fair that a reprobate like Rhett Butler should have so much and
she, who carried so heavy a load, should have so little. She hated him,
sitting there in his dandified attire, taunting her. Well, she wouldn't
swell his conceit by complimenting him on his cleverness. She longed
viciously for sharp words with which to cut him.

"I suppose you think it's honest to keep the Confederate money.
Well, it isn't. It's plain out and out stealing and you know it. I
wouldn't have that on my conscience."

"My! How sour the grapes are t

=== SCENE 70 ===
he's always one jump ahead of me.
There is always something wrong with his arguments but I never can put
my finger on just what it is.

"You might," she said with dignity, "distribute it to those who are
in need. The Confederacy is gone but there are plenty of Confederates
and their families who are starving."

He threw back his bead and laughed rudely.

"You are never so charming or so absurd as when you are airing some
hypocrisy like that," he cried in frank enjoyment. "Always tell the
truth, Scarlett. You can't lie. The Irish are the poorest liars in the
world. Come now, be frank. You never gave a damn about the late
lamented Confederacy and you care less about the starving Confederates.
You'd scream in protest if I even suggested giving away all the money
unless I started off by giving you the lion's share."

"I don't want your money," she began, trying to be coldly
dignified.

"Oh, don't you! Your palm is itching to beat the band this minute.
If I showed you a quarter, you'd leap on it."

"If you have come here to insult me and laugh at my poverty, I will
wish you good day," she retorted, trying to rid her lap of the heavy
ledger so she might rise and make her words more impressive. Instantly,
he was on his feet bending over her, laughing as he pushed her back
into her chair.

"When will you ever get over losing your temper when you hear the
truth? You never mind speaking the truth about other people, so why
should you mind hearing it about yourself? I'm not insulting you. I
think acquisitiveness is a very fine quality."

She was not sure what acquisitiveness meant but as he praised it she
felt slightly mollified.

"I didn't come to gloat over your poverty but to wish you long life
and happiness in your marriage. By the way, what did sister Sue think
of your larceny?"

"My what?"

"Your stealing Frank from under her nose."

"I did not—"

"Well, we won't quibble about the word. What did she say?"

"She said nothing," said Scarlett. His eyes danced as they gave her
the lie.

"How unselfish of her. Now, let's hear about your poverty. Surely I
have the right to know, after your little trip out to the jail not long
ago. Hasn't Frank as much money as you hoped?"

There was no evading his impudence. Either she would have to put up
with it or ask him to leave. And now she did not want him to leave. His
words were barbed but they were the barbs of truth. He knew what she
had done and why she had done it and he did not seem to think the less
of her for it. And though his questions were unpleasantly blunt, they
seemed actuated by a friendly interest. He was one person to whom she
could tell the truth. That would be a relief, for it had been so long
since she had told anyone the truth about herself and her motives.
Whenever she spoke her mind everyone seemed to be shocked. Talking to
Rhett was comparable only to one thing, the feeling of ease and comfort
afforded by a pair of old slippers after dancing in a pair too
tight.

"Didn't you get the money for the taxes? Don't tell me the wolf is
still at the door of Tara." There was a different tone in his
voice.

She looked up to meet his dark eyes and caught an expression which
startled and puzzled her at first, and then made her suddenly smile, a
sweet and charming smile which was seldom on her face these days. What
a perverse wretch he was, but how nice he could be at times! She knew
now that the real reason for his call was not to tease her but to make
sure she had gotten the money for which she had been so desperate. She
knew now that he had hurried to her as soon as he was released, without
the slightest appearance of hurry, to lend her the money if she still
needed it. And yet he would torment and insult her and deny that such
was his intent, should she accuse him. He was quite beyond all
comprehension. Did he really care about her, more than he was willing
to admit? Or did he have some other motive? Probably the latter, she
thought. But who could tell? He did such strange things sometimes.

"No," she said, "the wolf isn't at the door any longer. I—I got the
money."

"But not without a struggle, I'll warrant. Did you manage to
restrain yourself until you got the wedding ring on your finger?"

She tried not to smile at his accurate summing up of her conduct but
she could not help dimpling. He seated himself again, sprawling his
long legs comfortably.

"Well, tell me about your poverty. Did Frank, the brute, mislead you
about his prospects? He should be soundly thrashed for taking advantage
of a helpless female. Come, Scarlett, tell me everything. You should
have no secrets from me. Surely, I know the worst about you."

"Oh, Rhett, you're the worst—well, I don't know what! No, he didn't
exactly fool me but—" Suddenly it became a pleasure to unburden
herself. "Rhett, if Frank would just collect the money people owe him,
I wouldn't be worried about anything. But, Rhett, fifty people owe him
and he won't press them. He's so thin skinned. He says a gentleman
can't do that to another gentleman. And it may be months and may be
never before we get the money."

"Well, what of it? Haven't you enough to eat on until he does
collect?"

"Yes, but—well, as a matter of fact, I could use a little money
right now." Her eyes brightened as she thought of the mill.
"Perhaps—"

"What for? More taxes?"

"Is that any of your business?"

"Yes, because you are getting ready t

=== SCENE 71 ===
ruffled feathers and overlook my boorish remarks about
the proud and honorable Ashley. Strange how these illusions will
persist even in women as hard headed as you are. How much money do you
want and what do you want it for?"

When she did not answer he repeated:

"What do you want it for? And see if you can manage to tell me the
truth. It will do as well as a lie. In fact, better, for if you lie to
me, I'll be sure to find it out, and think how embarrassing that would
be. Always remember this, Scarlett, I can stand anything from you but a
lie—your dislike for me, your tempers, all your vixenish ways, but not
a lie. Now what do you want it for?"

Raging as she was at his attack on Ashley, she would have given
anything to spit on him and throw his offer of money proudly into his
mocking face. For a moment she almost did, but the cold hand of common
sense held her back. She swallowed her anger with poor grace and tried
to assume an expression of pleasant dignity. He leaned back in his
chair, stretching his legs toward the stove.

"If there's one thing in the world that gives me more amusement than
anything else," he remarked, "it's the sight of your mental struggles
when a matter of principle is laid up against something practical like
money. Of course, I know the practical in you will always win, but I
keep hanging around to see if your better nature won't triumph some
day. And when that day comes I shall pack my bag and leave Atlanta
forever. There are too many women whose better natures are always
triumphing...Well, let's get back to business. How much and what
for?"

"I don't know quite how much I'll need," she said sulkily. "But I
want to buy a sawmill—and I think I can get it cheap. And I'll need
two wagons and two mules. I want good mules, too. And a horse and buggy
for my own use."

"A sawmill?"

"Yes, and if you'll lend me the money, I'll give you a half-
interest in it."

"Whatever would I do with a sawmill?"

"Make money! We can make loads of money. Or I'll pay you interest on
the loan—let's see, what is good interest?"

"Fifty per cent is considered very fine."

"Fifty—oh, but you are joking! Stop laughing, you devil. I'm
serious."

"That's why I'm laughing. I wonder if anyone but me realizes what
goes on in that head back of your deceptively sweet face."

"Well, who cares? Listen, Rhett, and see if this doesn't sound like
good business to you. Frank told me about this man who has a sawmill, a
little one out Peachtree road, and he wants to sell it. He's got to
have cash money pretty quick and he'll sell it cheap. There aren't many
sawmills around here now, and the way people are rebuilding—why, we
could sell lumber sky high. The man will stay and run the mill for a
wage. Frank told me about it. Frank would buy the mill himself if he
had the money. I guess he was intending buying it with the money he
gave me for the taxes."

"Poor Frank! What is he going to say when you tell him you've bought
it yourself right out from under him? And how are you going to explain
my lending you the money without compromising your reputation?"

Scarlett had given no thought to this, so intent was she upon the
money the mill would bring in.

"Well, I just won't tell him."

"He'll know you didn't pick it off a bush."

"I'll tell him—why, yes, I'll tell him I sold you my diamond
earbobs. And I will give them to you, too. That'll be my collat— my
whatchucallit."

"I wouldn't take your earbobs."

"I don't want them. I don't like them. They aren't really mine,
anyway."

"Whose are they?"

Her mind went swiftly back to the still hot noon with the country
hush deep about Tara and the dead man in blue sprawled in the hall.

"They were left with me—by someone who's dead. They're mine all
right. Take them. I don't want them. I'd rather have the money for
them."

"Good Lord!" he cried impatiently. "Don't you ever think of anything
but money?"

"No," she replied frankly, turning hard green eyes upon him. "And if
you'd been through what I have, you wouldn't either. I've found out
that money is the most important thing in the world and, as God is my
witness, I don't ever intend to be without it again."

She remembered the hot sun, the soft red earth under her sick head,
the niggery smell of the cabin behind the ruins of Twelve Oaks,
remembered the refrain her heart had beaten: "I'll never be hungry
again. I'll never be hungry again."

"I'm going to have money some day, lots of it, so I can have
anything I want to eat. And then there'll never be any hominy or dried
peas on my table. And I'm going to have pretty clothes and all of them
are going to be silk—"

"All?"

"All," she said shortly, not even troubling to blush at his
implication. "I'm going to have money enough so the Yankees can never
take Tara away from me. And I'm going to have a new roof for Tara and a
new barn and fine mules for plowing and more cotton than you ever saw.
And Wade isn't ever going to know what it means to do without the
things he needs. Never! He's going to have everything in the world. And
all my family, they aren't ever going to be hungry again. I mean it.
Every word. You don't understand, you're such a selfish hound. You've
never had the Carpetbaggers trying to drive you out. You've never been
cold and ragged and had to break your back to keep from starving!"

He said quietly: "I was in the Confederate Army for eight months. I
don't know any better place for starving."

"The army! Bah! You've never had to pick cotton and weed corn.
You've— Don't you laugh at me!"

His hands were on hers again as her voice rose harshly.

"I wasn't laughing at you. I was laughing at the difference in what
you look and what you really are. And I was remembering the first time
I ever saw you, at the barbecue at the Wilkes'. You had on a green
dress and little green slippers, and you were knee deep in men and
quite full of yourself. I'll wager you didn't know then how many
pennies were in a dollar. There was only one idea in your whole mind
then and that was ensnaring Ash—"

She jerked her hands away from him.

"Rhett, if we are to get on at all, you'll have to stop talking
about Ashley Wilkes. We'll always fall out about him, because you can't
understand him."

"I suppose you understand him like a book," said Rhett maliciously.
"No, Scarlett, if I am to lend you the money I reserve the right to
discuss Ashley Wilkes in any terms I care to. I waive the right to
collect interest on my loan but not that right. And there are a number
of things about that young man I'd like to know."

"I do not have to discuss him with you," she answered shortly.

"Oh, but you do! I hold the purse strings, you see. Some day when
you are rich, you can have the power to do the same to others....
It's obvious that you still care about him—"

"I do not."

"Oh, it's so obvious from the way you rush to his defense.
You—"

"I won't stand having my friends sneered at."

"Well, we'll let that pass for the moment. Does he still care for
you or did Rock Island make him forget? Or perhaps he's learned to
appreciate what a jewel of a wife he has?"

At the mention of Melanie, Scarlett began to breathe hard and could
scarcely restrain herself from crying out the whole story, that only
honor kept Ashley with Melanie. She opened her mouth to speak and then
closed it.

"Oh. So he still hasn't enough sense to appreciate Mrs. Wilkes? And
the rigors of prison didn't dim his ardor for you?"

"I see no need to discuss the subject."

"I wish to discuss it," said Rhett. There was a low note in his
voice which Scarlett did not understand but did not like to hear. "And,
by God, I will discuss it and I expect you to answer me. So he's still
in love with you?"

"Well, what if he is?" cried Scarlett, goaded. "I don't care to
discuss him with you because you can't understand him or his kind of
love. The only kind of love you know about is just—well, the kind you
carry on with creatures like that Watling woman."

"Oh," said Rhett softly. "So I am only capable of carnal lusts?"

"Well, you know it's true."

"Now I appreciate your hesitance in discussing the matter with me.
My unclean hands and lips besmirch the purity of his love."

"Well, yes—something like that."

"I'm interested in this pure love—"

"Don't be so nasty, Rhett Butler. If you are vile enough to think
there's ever been anything wrong between us—"

"Oh, the thought never entered my head, really. That's why it all
interests me. Just why hasn't there been anything wrong between
you?"

"If you think that Ashley would—"

"Ah, so it's Ashley, and not you, who has fought the fight for
purity. Really, Scarlett, you should not give yourself away so
easily."

Scarlett looked into his smooth unreadable face in confusion and
indignation.

"We won't go any further with this and I don't want your money. So,
get out!"

"Oh, yes, you do want my money and, as we've gone this far, why
stop? Surely there can be no harm in discussing so chaste an idyl—
when there hasn't been anything wrong. So Ashley loves you for your
mind, your soul, your nobility of character?"

Scarlett writhed at his words. Of course, Ashley loved her for just
these things. It was this knowledge that made life endurable, this
knowledge that Ashley, bound by honor, loved her from afar for
beautiful things deep buried in her that he alone could see. But they
did not seem so beautiful when dragged to the light by Rhett,
especially in that deceptively smooth voice that covered sarcasm.

"It gives me back my boyish ideals to know that such a love can
exist in this naughty world," he continued. "So there's no touch of the
flesh in his love for you? It would be the same if you were ugly and
didn't have that white skin? And if you didn't have those green eyes
which make a man wonder just what you would do if he took you in his
arms? And a way of swaying your hips, that's an allurement to any man
under ninety? And those lips which are— well, I mustn't let my carnal
lusts obtrude. Ashley sees none of these things? Or if he sees them,
they move him not at all?"

Unbidden, Scarlett's mind went back to that day in the orchard when
Ashley's arms shook as he held her, when his mouth was hot on hers as
if he would never let her go. She went crimson at the memory and her
blush was not lost on Rhett.

"So," he said and there was a vibrant note almost like anger in his
voice. "I see. He loves you for your mind alone."

How dare he pry with dirty fingers, making the one beautiful sacred
thing in her life seem vile? Coolly, determinedly, he was breaking down
the last of her reserves and the information he wanted was
forthcoming.

"Yes, he does!" she cried, pushing back the memory of Ashley's
lips.

"My dear, he doesn't even know you've got a mind. If it was your
mind that attracted him, he would not need to struggle against you, as
he must have done to keep this love so—shall we say 'holy'? He could
rest easily for, after all, a man can admire a woman's mind and soul
and still be an honorable gentleman and true to his wife. But it must
be difficult for him to reconcile the honor of the Wilkeses with
coveting your body as he does."

"You judge everybody's mind by your own vile one!"

"Oh, I've never denied coveting you, if that's what you mean. But,
thank God, I'm not bothered about matters of honor. What I want I take
if I can get it, and so I wrestle neither with angels nor devils. What
a merry hell you must have made for Ashley! Almost I can be sorry for
him."

"I—I make a hell for him?"

"Yes, you! There you are, a constant temptation to him, but like
most of his breed he prefers what passes in these parts as honor to any
amount of love. And it looks to me as if the poor devil now had neither
love nor honor to warm himself!"

"He has love!...I mean, he loves me!"

"Does he? Then answer me this and we are through for the day and you
can take the money and throw it in the gutter for all I care."

Rhett rose to his feet and threw his half-smoked cigar into the
spittoon. There was about his movements the same pagan freedom and
leashed power Scarlett had noted that night Atlanta fell, something
sinister and a little frightening. "If he loved you, then why in hell
did he permit you to come to Atlanta to get the tax money? Before I'd
let a woman I loved do that, I'd—"

"He didn't know! He had no idea that I—"

"Doesn't it occur to you that he should have known?" There was
barely suppressed savagery in his voice. "Loving you as you say he
does, he should have known just what you would do when you were
desperate. He should have killed you rather than let you come up
here—and to me, of all people! God in Heaven!"

"But he didn't know!"

"If he didn't guess it without being told, he'll never know anything
about you and your precious mind."

How unfair he was! As if Ashley was a mind reader! As if Ashley
could have stopped her, even had he known! But, she knew suddenly,
Ashley could have stopped her. The faintest intimation from him, in the
orchard, that some day things might be different and she would never
have thought of going to Rhett. A word of tenderness, even a parting
caress when she was getting on the train, would have held her back. But
he had only talked of honor. Yet—was Rhett right? Should Ashley have
known her mind? Swiftly she put the disloyal thought from her. Of
course, he didn't suspect. Ashley would never suspect that she would
even think of doing anything so immoral. Ashley was too fine to have
such thoughts. Rhett was just trying to spoil her love. He was trying
to tear down what was most precious to her. Some day, she thought
viciously, when the store was on its feet and the mill doing nicely and
she had money, she would make Rhett Butler pay for the misery and
humiliation he was causing her.

He was standing over her, looking down at her, faintly amused. The
emotion which had stirred him was gone.

"What does it all matter to you anyway?" she asked. "It's my
business and Ashley's and not yours."

He shrugged.

"Only this. I have a deep and impersonal admiration for your
endurance, Scarlett, and I do not like to see your spirit crushed
beneath too many millstones. There's Tara. That's a man-sized job in
itself. There's your sick father added on. He'll never be any help to
you. And the girls and the darkies. And now you've taken on a husband
and probably Miss Pittypat, too. You've enough burdens without Ashley
Wilkes and his family on your hands."

"He's not on my hands. He helps—"

"Oh, for God's sake," he said impatiently. "Don't let's have any
more of that. He's no help. He's on your hands and he'll be on them, or
on somebody's, till he dies. Personally, I'm sick of him as a topic of
conversation...How much money do you want?"

Vituperative words rushed to her lips. After all his insults, after
dragging from her those things which were most precious to her and
trampling on them, he still thought she would take his money!

But the words were checked unspoken. How wonderful it would be to
scorn his offer and order him out of the store! But only the truly rich
and the truly secure could afford this luxury. So long as she was poor,
just so long would she have to endure such scenes as this. But when she
was rich—oh, what a beautiful warming thought that was!—when she was
rich, she wouldn't stand anything she didn't like, do without anything
she desired or even be polite to people unless they pleased her.

I shall tell them all to go to Halifax, she thought, and Rhett
Butler will be the first one!

The pleasure in the thought brought a sparkle into her green eyes
and a half-smile to her lips. Rhett smiled too.

"You're a pretty person, Scarlett," he said. "Especially when you
are meditating devilment. And just for the sight of that dimple I'll
buy you a baker's dozen of mules if you want them."

The front door opened and the counter boy entered, picking his teeth
with a quill. Scarlett rose, pulled her shawl about her and tied her
bonnet strings firmly under her chin. Her mind was made up.

"Are you busy this afternoon? Can you come with me now?" she
asked.

"Where?"

"I want you to drive to the mill with me. I promised Frank I
wouldn't drive out of town by myself."

"To the mill in this rain?"

"Yes, I want to buy that mill now, before you change your mind."

He laughed so loudly the boy behind the counter started and looked
at him curiously.

"Have you forgotten you are married? Mrs. Kennedy can't afford to be
seen driving out into the country with that Butler reprobate, who isn't
received in the best parlors. Have you forgotten your reputation?"

"Reputation, fiddle-dee-dee! I want that mill before you change your
mind or Frank finds out that I'm buying it. Don't be a slow poke,
Rhett. What's a little rain? Let's hurry."


That sawmill! Frank groaned every time he thought of it, cursing
himself for ever mentioning it to her. It was bad enough for her to
sell her earrings to Captain Butler (of all people!) and buy the mill
without even consulting her own husband about it, but it was worse
still that she did not turn it over to him to operate. That looked bad.
As if she did not trust him or his judgment.

Frank, in common with all men he knew, felt that a wife should be
g

=== SCENE 72 ===
. No one could be more dominating than stout Mrs.
Merriwether, more imperious than frail Mrs. Elsing, more artful in
securing her own ends than the silver-haired sweet-voiced Mrs. Whiting.
But no matter what devices these ladies employed in order to get their
own way, they were always feminine devices. They made a point of being
deferential to men's opinions, whether they were guided by them or not.
They had the politeness to appear to be guided by what men said, and
that was what mattered. But Scarlett was guided by no one but herself
and was conducting her affairs in a masculine way which had the whole
town talking about her.

"And," thought Frank miserably, "probably talking about me too, for
letting her act so unwomanly."

Then, there was that Butler man. His frequent calls at Aunt Pitty's
house were the greatest humiliation of all. Frank had always disliked
him, even when he had done business with him before the war. He often
cursed the day he had brought Rhett to Twelve Oaks and introduced him
to his friends. He despised him for the cold-blooded way he had acted
in his speculations during the war and for the fact that he had not
been in the army. Rhett's eight months' service with the Confederacy
was known only to Scarlett, for Rhett had begged her, with mock fear,
not to reveal his "shame" to anyone. Most of all Frank had contempt for
him for holding on to the Confederate gold, when honest men like
Admiral Bulloch and others confronted with the same situation had
turned back thousands to the Federal treasury. But whether Frank liked
it or not, Rhett was a frequent caller.

Ostensibly it was Miss Pitty he came to see and she had no better
sense than to believe it and give herself airs over his visits. But
Frank had an uncomfortable feeling that Miss Pitty was not the
attraction which brought him. Little Wade was very fond of him, though
the boy was shy of most people, and even called him "Uncle Rhett,"
which annoyed Frank. And Frank could not help remembering that Rhett
had squired Scarlett about during the war days and there had been talk
about them then. He imagined there might be even worse talk about them
now. None of his friends had the courage to mention anything of this
sort to Frank, for all their outspoken words on Scarlett's conduct in
the matter of the mill. But he could not help noticing that he and
Scarlett were less frequently invited to meals and parties and fewer
and fewer people came to call on them. Scarlett disliked most of her
neighbor

=== SCENE 73 ===
can we do?" she thought, wringing her hands in an agony of
helpless fear. "What can we do with devils who'd hang a nice boy like
Tony just for killing a drunken buck and a scoundrelly Scallawag to
protect his women folks?"

"It isn't to be borne!" Tony had cried and he was right. It couldn't
be borne. But what could they do except bear it, helpless as they were?
She fell to trembling and, for the first time in her life, she saw
people and events as something apart from herself, saw clearly that
Scarlett O'Hara, frightened and helpless, was not all that mattered.
There were thousands of women like her, all over the South, who were
frightened and helpless. And thousands of men, who had laid down their
arms at Appomattox, had taken them up again and stood ready to risk
their necks on a minute's notice to protect those women.

There had been something in Tony's face which had been mirrored in
Frank's, an expression she had seen recently on the faces of other men
in Atlanta, a look she had noticed but had not troubled to analyze. It
was an expression vastly different from the tired helplessness she had
seen in the faces of men coming home from the war after the surrender.
Those men had not cared about anything except getting home. Now they
were caring about something again, numbed nerves were coming back to
life and the old spirit was beginning to burn. They were caring again
with a cold ruthless bitterness. And, like Tony, they were thinking:
"It isn't to be borne!"

She had seen Southern men, soft voiced and dangerous in the days
before the war, reckless and hard in the last despairing days of the
fighting. But in the faces of the two men who stared at each other
across the candle flame so short a while ago there had been something
that was different, something that heartened her but frightened
her—fury which could find no words, determination which would stop at
nothing.

For the first time, she felt a kinship with the people about her,
felt one with them in their fears, their bitterness, their
determination. No, it wasn't to be borne! The South was too beautiful a
place to be let go without a struggle, too loved to be trampled by
Yankees who hated Southerners enough to enjoy grinding them into the
dirt, too dear a homeland to be turned over to ignorant negroes drunk
with whisky and freedom.

As she thought of Tony's sudden entrance and swift exit, she felt
herself akin to him, for she remembered the old story how her father
had left Ireland, left hastily and by night, after a murder which was
no murder to him or to his family. Gerald's blood was in her, violent
blood. She remembered her hot joy in shooting the marauding Yankee.
Violent blood was in them all, perilously close to the surface, lurking
just beneath the kindly courteous exteriors. All of them, all the men
she knew, even the drowsy-eyed Ashley and fidgety old Frank, were like
that underneath—murderous, violent if the need arose. Even Rhett,
conscienceless scamp that he was, had killed a negro for being "uppity
to a lady."

"Oh, Frank, how long will it be like this?" she leaped to her
feet.

"As long as the Yankees hate us so, Sugar."

"Is there nothing anybody can do?"

Frank passed a tired hand over his wet beard. "We are doing
things."

"What?"

"Why talk of them till we have accomplished something? It may take
years. Perhaps—perhaps the South will always be like this."

"Oh, no!"

"Sugar, come to bed. You must be chilled.

=== SCENE 74 ===
brightly painted, and comported
themselves more quietly than those of other houses. At least, the
police were seldom summoned to Belle's.

This house was something that the matrons of Atlanta whispered about
furtively and ministers preached against in guarded terms as a cesspool
of iniquity, a hissing and a reproach. Everyone knew that a woman of
Belle's type couldn't have made enough money by herself to set up such
a luxurious establishment. She had to have a backer and a rich one at
that. And Rhett Butler had never had the decency to conceal his
relations with her, so it was obvious that he and no other must be that
backer. Belle herself presented a prosperous appearance when glimpsed
occasionally in her closed carriage driven by an impudent yellow negro.
When she drove by, behind a fine pair of bays, all the little boys
along the street who could evade their mothers ran to peer at her and
whisper excitedly: "That's her! That's ole Belle! I seen her red
hair!"

Shouldering the shell-pitted houses patched with bits of old lumber
and smoke-blackened bricks, the fine homes of the Carpetbaggers and war
profiteers were rising, with mansard roofs, gables and turrets,
stained-glass windows and wide lawns. Night after night, in these newly
built homes, the windows were ablaze with gas light and the sound of
music and dancing feet drifted out upon the air. Women in stiff
bright-colored silks strolled about long verandas, squired by men in
evening clothes. Champagne corks popped, and on lace tablecloths
seven-course dinners were laid. Hams in wine, pressed duck, pate de
foie gras, rare fruits in and out of season, were spread in
profusion.

Behind the shabby doors of the old houses, poverty and hunger
lived—all the more bitter for the brave gentility with which they were
borne, all the more pinching for the outward show of proud indifference
to material wants. Dr. Meade could tell unlovely stories of those
families who had been driven from mansions to boarding houses and from
boarding houses to dingy rooms on back streets. He had too many lady
patients who were suffering from "weak hearts" and "declines." He knew,
and they knew he knew, that slow starvation was the trouble. He could
tell of consumption making inroads on entire families and of pellagra,
once found only among poor whites, which was now appearing in Atlanta's
best families. And there were babies with thin rickety legs and mothers
who could not nurse them. Once the old doctor had been wont to thank
God reverently for each child he brought into the world. Now he did not
think life was such a boon. It was a hard world for little babies and
so many died in their first few months of life.

Bright lights and wine, fiddles and dancing, brocade and broadcloth
in the showy big houses and, just around the corners, slow starvation
and cold. Arrogance and callousness for the conquerors, bitter
endurance and hatred for the conquered.

CHAPTER XXXVIII

Scarlett saw it all, lived with it by day, took it to bed with her
at night, dreading always what might happen next. She knew that she and
Frank were already in the Yankees' black books, because of Tony, and
disaster might descend on them at any hour. But, now of all times, she
could not afford to be pushed back to her beginnings—not now with a
baby coming, the mill just commencing to pay and Tara depending on her
for money until the cotton came in in the fall. Oh, suppose she should
lose everyt

=== SCENE 75 ===
upport, and then, too, I've got my mother and
two widowed sisters down in Sparta to look after. Hugh is nice, and you
wanted a nice man, and he's from nice folks, as you know, and he's
honest."

"But—well, Hugh hasn't got much gumption or else he'd make a
success of his kindling."

Tommy shrugged.

"You've got a hard way of looking at things, Scarlett," he said.
"But you think Hugh over. You could go far and do worse. I think his
honesty and his willingness will outweigh his lack of gumption."

Scarlett did not answer, for she did not want to be too rude. But to
her mind there were few, if any, qualities that out-weighed
gumption.

After she had unsuccessfully canvassed the town and refused the
importuning of many eager Carpetbaggers, she finally decided to take
Tommy's suggestion and ask Hugh Elsing. He had been a dashing and
resourceful officer during the war, but two severe wounds and four
years of fighting seemed to have drained him of all his
resourcefulness, leaving him to face the rigors of peace as bewildered
as a child. There was a lost-dog look in his eyes these days as he went
about peddling his firewood, and he was not at all the kind of man she
had hoped to get.

"He's stupid," she thought. "He doesn't know a thing about business
and I'll bet he can't add two and two. And I doubt if he'll ever learn.
But, at least, he's honest and won't swindle me."

Scarlett had little use these days for honesty in herself, but the
less she valued it in herself the more she was beginning to value it in
others.

"It's a pity Johnnie Gallegher is tied up with Tommy Wellburn on
that construction work," she thought. "He's just the kind of man I
want. He's hard as nails and slick as a snake, but he'd be honest if it
paid him to be honest. I understand him and he understands me and we
could do business together very well. Maybe I can get him when the
hotel is finished and till then I'll have to make out on Hugh and Mr.
Johnson. If I put Hugh in charge of the new mill and leave Mr. Johnson
at the old one, I can stay in town and see to the selling while they
handle the milling and hauling. Until I can get Johnnie I'll have to
risk Mr. Johnson robbing me if I stay in town all the time. If only he
wasn't a thief! I believe I'll build a lumber yard on half that lot
Charles left me. If only Frank didn't holler so loud about me building
a saloon on the other half! Well, I shall build the saloon just as soon
as I get enough money ahead, no matter how he takes on. If only Frank
wasn't so thin skinned. Oh, God, if only I wasn't going to have a baby
at this of all times! In a little while I'll be so big I can't go out.
Oh, God, if only I wasn't going to have a baby! And oh, God, if the
damned Yankees will only let me alone! If—"

If! If! If! There were so many ifs in life, never any certainty of
anything, never any sense of security, always the dread of losing
everything and being cold and hungry again. Of course, Frank was making
a little more money now, but Frank was always ailing with colds and
frequently forced to stay in bed for days. Suppose he should become an
invalid. No, she could not afford to count on Frank for much. She must
not count on anything or anybody but herself. And what she could earn
seemed so pitiably small. Oh, what would she do if the Yankees came and
took it all away from her? If! If! If!

Half of what she made every month went to Will at Tara, part to
Rhett to repay his loan and the rest she hoarded. No miser ever counted
his gold oftener than she and no miser ever had greater fear of losing
it. She would not put the money in the bank, for it might fail or the
Yankees might confiscate it. So she carried what she could with her,
tucked into her corset, and hid small wads of bills about the house,
under loose bricks on the hearth, in her scrap bag, between the pages
of the Bible. And her temper grew shorter and shorter as the weeks went
by, for

=== SCENE 76 ===
putation for possessing these
qualities. But the meshes of her brain were too wide, too coarse, to
filter such small differences. It was enough that some day, when she
had money, everyone would approve of her.

Some day! But not now. Not now, in spite of what anyone might say of
her. Now, there was no time to be a great lady.

Peter was as good as his word. Aunt Pitty did get into a state, and
Peter's misery developed overnight to such proportions that he never
drove the buggy again. Thereafter Scarlett drove alone and the calluses
which had begun to leave her palms came back again.

So the spring months went by, the cool rains of April passing into
the warm balm of green May weather. The weeks were packed with work and
worry and the handicaps of increasing pregnancy, with old friends
growing cooler and her family increasingly more kind, more maddeningly
solicitous and more completely blind to what was driving her. During
those days of anxiety and struggle there was only one dependable,
understanding person in her world, and that person was Rhett Butler. It
was odd that he of all people should appear in this light, for he was
as unstable as quicksilver and as perverse as a demon fresh from the
pit. But he gave her sympathy, something she had never had from anyone
and never expected from him.

Frequently he was out of town on those mysterious trips to New
Orleans which he never explained but which she felt sure, in a faintly
jealous way, were connected with a woman—or women. But after Uncle
Peter's refusal to drive her, he remained in Atlanta for longer and
longer intervals.

While in town, he spent most of his time gambling in the rooms above
the Girl of the Period Saloon, or in Belle Watling's bar hobnobbing
with the wealthier of the Yankees and Carpetbaggers in money-making
schemes which made the townspeople detest him even more than his
cronies. He did not call at the house now, probably in deference to the
feelings of Frank and Pitty who would have been outraged at a male
caller while Scarlett was in a delicate condition. But she met him by
accident almost every day. Time and again, he came riding up to her
buggy when she was passing through lonely stretches of Peachtree road
and Decatur road where the mills lay. He always drew rein and talked
and sometimes he tied his horse to the back of the buggy and drove her
on her rounds. She tired more easily these days than she liked to admit
and she was always silently grateful when he took the reins. He always
left her before they reached the town again but all Atlanta knew about
their meetings, and it gave the gossips something new to add to the
long list of Scarlett's affronts to the proprieties.

She wondered occasionally if these meetings were not more than
accidental. They became more and more numerous as the weeks went by and
as the tension in town heightened over negro outrages. But why did he
seek her out, now of all times when she looked her worst? Certainly he
had no designs upon her if he had ever had any, and she was beginning
to doubt even this. It had been months since he made any joking
references to their distressing scene at the Yankee jail. He never
mentioned Ashley and her love for him, or made any coarse and ill-bred
remarks about "coveting her." She thought it best to let sleeping dogs
lie, so she did not ask for an explanation of their frequent meetings.
And finally she decided that, because he had little to do besides
gamble and had few enough nice friends in Atlanta, he sought her out
solely for companionship's sake.

Whatever his reason might be, she found his company most welcome. He
listened to her moans about lost customers and bad debts, the swindling
ways of Mr. Johnson and the incompetency of Hugh. He applauded her
triumphs, where Frank merely smiled indulgently and Pitty said "Dear
me!" in a dazed manner. She was sure that he frequently threw business
her way, for he knew all the rich Yankees and Carpetbaggers intimately,
but he always denied being helpful. She knew him for what he was and
she never trusted him, but her spirits always rose with pleasure at the
sight of him riding around the curve of a shady road on his big black
horse. When he climbed into the buggy and took the reins from her and
threw her some impertinent remark, she felt young and gay and
attractive again, for all her worries and her increasing bulk. She
could talk to him about almost everything, with no care for concealing
her motives or her real opinions and she never ran out of things to say
as she did with Frank—or even with Ashley, if she must be honest with
herself. But of course, in all her conversations with Ashley there were
so many things which could not be said, for honor's sake, that the
sheer force of them inhibited other remarks. It was comforting to have
a friend like Rhett, now that for some unaccountable reason he had
decided to be on good behavior with her. Very comforting, for she had
so few friends these days.

"Rhett," she asked stormily, shortly after Uncle Peter's ultimatum,
"why do folks in this town treat me so scurvily and talk about me so?
It's a toss-up who they talk worst about, me or the Carpetbaggers! I've
minded my own business and haven't done anything wrong and—"

"If you haven't done anything wrong, it's because you haven't had
the opportunity, and perhaps they dimly realize it."

"Oh, do be serious! They make me so mad. All I've done is try to
make a little money and—"

"All you've done is to be different from other women and you've made
a little success at it. As I've told you before, that is the one
unforgivable sin in any society. Be different and be damned! Scarlett,
the mere fact that you've made a success of your mill is an insult to
every man who hasn't succeeded. Remember, a well-bred female's place is
in the home and she should know nothing about this busy, brutal
world."

"But if I had stayed in my home, I wouldn't have had any home left
to stay in."

"The inference is that you should have starved genteelly and with
pride."

"Oh, fiddle-dee-dee! But look at Mrs. Merriwether. She's selling
pies to Yankees and that's worse than running a sawmill, and Mrs.
Elsing takes in sewing and keeps boarders, and Fanny paints awful-
looking china things that nobody wants and everybody buys to help her
and—"

"But you miss the point, my pet. They aren't successful and so they
aren't affronting the hot Southern pride of their men folks. The men
can still say, 'Poor sweet sillies, how hard they try! Well, I'll let
them think they're helping.' And besides, the ladies you mentioned
don't enjoy having to work. They let it be known that they are only
doing it until some man comes along to relieve them of their unwomanly
burdens. And so everybody feels sorry for them. But obviously you do
like to work and obviously you aren't going to let any man tend to your
business for you, and so no one can feel sorry for you. And Atlanta is
never going to forgive you for that. It's so pleasant to feel sorry for
people."

"I wish you'd be serious, sometimes."

"Did you ever hear the Oriental proverb: 'The dogs bark but the
caravan passes on?' Let them bark, Scarlett. I fear nothing will stop
your caravan."

"But why should they mind my making a little money?"

"You can't have everything, Scarlett. You can either make money in
your present unladylike manner and meet cold shoulders everywhere you
go, or you can be poor and genteel and have lots of friends. You've
made your choice."

"I won't be poor," she said swiftly. "But—it is the right choice,
isn't it?"

"If it's money you want most."

"Yes, I want money more than anything else in the world."

"Then you've made the only choice. But there's a penalty attached,
as there is to most things you want. It's loneliness."

That silenced her for a moment. It was true. When she stopped to
think about it, she was a little lonely—lonely for feminine
companionship. During the war years she had had Ellen to visit when she
felt blue. And since Ellen's death, there had always been Melanie,
though she and Melanie had nothing in common except the hard work at
Tara. Now there was no one, for Aunt Pitty had no conception of life
beyond her small round of gossip.

"I think—I think," she began hesitantly, "that I've always been
lonely where women were concerned. It isn't just my working that makes
Atlanta ladies dislike me. They just don't like me anyway. No woman
ever really liked me, except Mother. Even my sisters. I don't know why,
but even before the war, even before I married Charlie, ladies didn't
seem to approve of anything I did—"

"You forget Mrs. Wilkes," said Rhett and his eyes gleamed
maliciously. "She has always approved of you up to the hilt. I daresay
she'd approve of anything you did, short of murder."

Scarlett thought grimly: "She's even approved of murder," and she
laughed contemptuously.

"Oh, Melly!" she said, and then, ruefully: "It's certainly not to my
credit that Melly is the only woman who approves of me, for she hasn't
the sense of a guinea hen. If she had any sense—" She stopped in some
confusion.

"If she had any sense, she'd realize a few things and she couldn't
approve," Rhett finished. "Well, you know more about that than I do, of
course."

"Oh, damn your memory and your bad manners!"

"I'll pass over your unjustified rudeness with the silence it
deserves and return to our former subject. Make up your mind to this.
If you are different, you are isolated, not only from people of your
own age but from those of your parents' generation and from your
children's generation too. They'll never understand you and they'll be
shocked no matter what you do. But your grand

=== SCENE 77 ===
on brawl long before I was born.
His death was, needless to say, a great relief to his children, for the
old gentleman was drunk most of the time and when in his cups was apt
to forget that he was a retired sea captain and give reminiscences that
curled his children's hair. However, I admired him and tried to copy
him far more than I ever did my father, for Father is an amiable
gentleman full of honorable habits and pious saws—so you see how it
goes. I'm sure your children won't approve of you, Scarlett, any more
than Mrs. Merriwether and Mrs. Elsing and their broods approve of you
now. Your children will probably be soft, prissy creatures, as the
children of hard-bitten characters usually are. And to make them worse,
you, like every other mother, are probably determined that they shall
never know the hardships you've known. And that's all wrong. Hardships
make or break people. So you'll have to wait for approval from your
grandchildren."

"I wonder what our grandchildren will be like!"

"Are you suggesting by that 'our' that you and I will have mutual
grandchildren? Fie, Mrs. Kennedy!"

Scarlett, suddenly conscious of her error of speech, went red. It
was more than his joking words that shamed her, for she was suddenly
aware again of her thickening body. In no way had either of them ever
hinted at her condition and she had always kept the lap robe high under
her armpits when with him, even on warm days, comforting herself in the
usual feminine manner with the belief that she did not show at all when
thus covered, and she was suddenly sick with quick rage at her own
condition and shame that he should know.

"You get out of this buggy, you dirty-minded varmit," she said, her
voice shaking.

"I'll do nothing of the kind," he returned calmly. "It'll be dark
before you get home and there's a new colony of darkies living in tents
and shanties near the next spring, mean niggers I've been told, and I
see no reason why you should give the impulsive Ku Klux a cause for
putting on their nightshirts and riding abroad this evening."

"Get out!" she cried, tugging at the reins and suddenly nausea
overwhelmed her. He stopped the horse quickly, passed her two clean
handkerchiefs and held her head over the side of the buggy with some
skill. The afternoon sun, slanting low through the newly leaved trees,
spun sickeningly for a few moments in a swirl of gold and green. When
the spell had passed, she put her head in her hands and cried from
sheer mortification. Not only had she vomited before a man—in itself
as horrible a contretemps as could overtake a woman—but by doing so,
the humiliating fact of her pregnancy must now be evident. She felt
that she could never look him in the face again. To have this happen
with him, of all people, with Rhett who had no respect for women! She
cried, expecting some coarse and jocular remark from him which she
would never be able to forget.

"Don't be a fool," he said quietly. "And you are a fool, if you are
crying for shame. Come, Scarlett, don't be a child. Surely you must
know that, not being blind, I knew you were pregnant."

She said "Oh" in a stunned voice and tightened her fingers over her
crimson face. The word itself horrified her. Frank always referred to
her pregnancy embarrassedly as

=== SCENE 78 ===
easily as though he had not marked it.

"Then we're different. I like babies."

"You like them?" she cried, looking up, so startled at the statement
that she forgot her embarrassment. "What a liar you are!"

"I like babies and I like little children, till they begin to grow
up and acquire adult habits of thought and adult abilities to lie and
cheat and be dirty. That can't be news to you. You know I like Wade
Hampton a lot, for all that he isn't the boy he ought to be."

That was true, thought Scarlett, suddenly marveling. He did seem to
enjoy playing with Wade and often brought him presents.

"Now that we've brought this dreadful subject into the light and you
admit that you expect a baby some time in the not too distant future,
I'll say something I've been wanting to say for weeks—two things. The
first is that it's dangerous for you to drive alone. You know it.
You've been told it often enough. If you don't care personally whether
or not you are raped, you might consider the consequences. Because of
your obstinacy, you may get yourself into a situation where your
gallant fellow townsmen will be forced to avenge you by stringing up a
few darkies. And that will bring the Yankees down on them and someone
will probably get hanged. Has it ever occurred to you that perhaps one
of the reasons the ladies do not like you is that your conduct may
cause the neck-stretching of their sons and husbands? And furthermore,
if the Ku Klux handles many more negroes, the Yankees are going to
tighten up on Atlanta in a way that will make Sherman's conduct look
angelic. I know what I'm talking about, for I'm hand in glove with the
Yankees. Shameful to state, they treat me as one of them and I hear
them talk openly. They mean to stamp out the Ku Klux if it means
burning the whole town again and hanging every male over ten. That
would hurt you, Scarlett. You might lose money. And there's no telling
where a prairie fire will stop, once it gets started. Confiscation of
property, higher taxes, fines for suspected women— I've heard them all
suggested. The Ku Klux—"

"Do you know any Ku Klux? Is Tommy Wellburn or Hugh or—"

He shrugged impatiently.

"How should I know? I'm a renegade, a turncoat, a Scallawag. Would I
be likely to know? But I do know men who are suspected by the Yankees
and one false move from them and they are as good as hanged. While I
know you would have no regrets at getting your neighbors on the
gallows, I do believe you'd regret losing your mills. I see by the
stubborn look on your face that you do not believe me and my words are
falling on stony ground. So all I can say is, keep that pistol of yours
handy—and when I'm in town, I'll try to be on hand to drive you."

"Rhett, do you really—is it to protect me that you—"

"Yes, my dear, it is my much advertised chivalry that makes me
protect you." The mocking light began to dance in his black eyes and
all signs of earnestness fled from his face. "And why? Because of my
deep love for you, Mrs. Kennedy. Yes, I have silently hungered and
thirsted for you and worshipped you from afar; but being an honorable
man, like Mr. Ashley Wilkes, I have concealed it from you. You are,
alas, Frank's wife and honor has forbidden my telling this to you. But
even as Mr. Wilkes' honor cracks occasionally, so mine is cracking now
and I reveal my secret passion and my—"

"Oh, for God's sake, hush!" interrupted Scarlett, annoyed as usual
when he made her look like a conceited fool, and not caring to have
Ashley and his honor become the subject of further conversation. "What
was the other thing you wanted to tell me?"

"What! You change the subject when I am baring a loving but
lacerated heart? Well, the other thing is this." The mocking light died
out of his eyes again and his face was dark and quiet.

"I want you to do something about this horse. He's stubborn and he's
got a mouth as tough as iron. Tires you to drive him, doesn't it? Well,
if he chose to bolt, you couldn't possibly stop him. And if you turned
over in a ditch, it might kill your baby and you too. You ought to get
the heaviest curb bit you can, or else let me swap him for a gentle
horse with a more sensitive mouth."

She looked up into his blank, smooth face and suddenly her
irritation fell away, even as her embarrassment had disappeared after
the conversation about her pregnancy. He had been kind, a few moments
before, to put her at her ease when she was wishing that she were dead.
And he was being kinder now and very thoughtful about the horse. She
felt a rush of gratitude to him and she wondered why he could not
always be this way.

"The horse is hard to drive," she agreed meekly. "Sometimes my arms
ache all night from tugging at him. You do what you think best about
him, Rhett."

His eyes sparkled wickedly.

"That sounds very sweet and feminine, Mrs. Kennedy. Not in your
usual masterful vein at all. Well, it only takes proper handling to
make a clinging vine out of you."

She scowled and her temper came back.

"You will get out of this buggy this time, or I will hit you with
the whip. I don't know why I put up with you—why I try to be nice to
you. You have no manners. You have no morals. You are nothing but a—
Well, get out. I mean it."

But when he had climbed

=== SCENE 79 ===
Will reporting about the plowing, the planting, the growing of the
cotton made her long anew to be home again.

I'll go home in June. I can't do anything here after that. I'll go
home for a couple of months, she thought, and her heart would rise. She
did go home in June but not as she longed to go, for early in that
month came a brief message from Will that Gerald was dead.

CHAPTER XXXIX

The train was very late and the long, deeply blue twilight of June
was settling over the countryside when Scarlett alighted in Jonesboro.
Yellow gleams of lamplight showed in the stores and houses which
remained in the village, but they were few. Here and there were wide
gaps between the buildings on the main street where dwellings had been
shelled or burned. Ruined houses with shell holes in their roofs and
half the walls torn away stared at her, silent and dark. A few saddle
horses and mule teams were hitched outside the wooden awning of
Bullard's store. The dusty red road was empty and lifeless, and the
only sounds in the village were a few whoops and drunken laughs that
floated on the still twilight air from a saloon far down the
street.

The depot had not been rebuilt since it was burned in the battle and
in its place was only a wooden shelter, with no sides to keep out the
weather. Scarlett walked under it and sat down on one of the empty kegs
that were evidently put there for seats. She peered up and down the
street for Will Benteen. Will should have been here to meet her. He
should have known she would take the first train possible after
receiving his laconic message that Gerald was dead.

She had come so hurriedly that she had in her small carpetbag only a
nightgown and a tooth brush, not even a change of underwear. She was
uncomfortable in the tight black dress she had borrowed from Mrs.
Meade, for she had had no time to get mourning clothes for herself.
Mrs. Meade was thin now, and Scarlett's pregnancy being advanced, the
dress was doubly uncomfortable. Even in her sorrow at Gerald's death,
she did not forget the appearance she was making and she looked down at
her body with distaste. Her figure was completely gone and her face and
ankles were puffy. Heretofore she had not cared very much how she
looked but now that she would see Ashley within the hour she cared
greatly. Even in her heartbreak, she shrank from the thought of facing
him when she was carrying another man's child. She loved him and he
loved her, and this unwanted child now seemed to her a proof of
infidelity to that love. But much as she disliked having him see her
with the slenderness gone from her waist and the lightness from her
step, it was something she could not escape now.

She patted her foot impatiently. Will should have met her. Of
course, she could go over to Bullard's and inquire after him or ask
someone there to drive her over to Tara, should she find he had been
unable to come. But she did not want to go to Bullard's. It was
Saturday night and probably half the men of the County would be there.
She did not want to display her condition in this poorly fitting black
dress which accentuated rather than hid her figure. And she did not
want to hear the kindly sympathy that would be poured out about Gerald.
She did not want sympathy. She was afraid she would cry if anyone even
mentioned his name to her. And she wouldn't cry. She knew if she once
began it would be like the time she cried into the horse's mane, that
dreadful night when Atlanta fell and Rhett had left her on the dark
road outside the town, terrible tears that tore her heart and could not
be stopped.

No, she wouldn't cry! She felt the lump in her throat rising again,
as it had done so often since the news came, but crying wouldn't do any
good. It would only confuse and weaken her. Why, oh, why hadn't Will or
Melanie or the girls written her that Gerald was ailing? She would have
taken the first train to Tara to care for him, brought a doctor from
Atlanta if necessary. The fools

=== SCENE 80 ===
uart Tarleton would have married
her had he not been killed at Gettysburg, and so she was accorded the
respect due a woman who had been wanted if not wed.

The six rooms of the little house on Ivy Street were soon scantily
furnished with the cheapest pine and oak furniture in Frank's store
for, as Ashley was penniless and forced to buy on credit, he refused
anything except the least expensive and bought only the barest
necessities. This embarrassed Frank who was fond of Ashley and it
distressed Scarlett. Both she and Frank would willingly have given,
without any charge, the finest mahogany and carved rosewood in the
store, but the Wilkeses obstinately refused. Their house was painfully
ugly and bare and Scarlett hated to see Ashley living in the
uncarpeted, uncurtained rooms. But he did not seem to notice his
surroundings and Melanie, having her own home for the first time since
her marriage, was so happy she was actually proud of the place.
Scarlett would have suffered agonies of humiliation at having friends
find her without draperies and carpets and cushions and the proper
number of chairs and teacups and spoons. But Melanie did the honors of
her house as though plush curtains and brocade sofas were hers.

For all her obvious happiness, Melanie was not well. Little Beau had
cost her her health, and the hard work she had done at Tara since his
birth had taken further toll of her strength. She was so thin that her
small bones seemed ready to come through her white skin. Seen from a
distance, romping about the back yard with her child, she looked like a
little girl, for her waist was unbelievably tiny and she had
practically no figure. She had no bust and her hips were as flat as
little Beau's and as she had neither the pride nor the good sense (so
Scarlett thought) to sew ruffles in the bosom of her basque or pads on
the back of her corsets, her thinness was very obvious. Like her body,
her face was too thin and too pale and her silky brows, arched and
delicate as a butterfly's feelers, stood out too blackly against her
colorless skin. In her small face, her eyes were too large for beauty,
the dark smudges under them making them appear enormous, but the
expression in them had not altered since the days of her unworried
girlhood. War and constant pain and hard work had been powerless
against their sweet tranquillity. They were the eyes of a happy woman,
a woman around whom storms might blow without ever ruffling the serene
core of her being.

How did she keep her eyes that way, thought Scarlett, looking at her
enviously. She knew her own eyes sometimes had the look of a hungry
cat. What was it Rhett had said once about Melanie's eyes— some
foolishness about them being like candles? Oh, yes, like two good deeds
in a naughty world. Yes, they were like candles, candles shielded from
every wind, two soft lights glowing with happiness at being home again
among her friends.

The little house was always full of company. Melanie had been a
favorite even as a child and the town flocked to welcome her home
again. Everyone brought presents for the house, bric-a-brac, pictures,
a silver spoon or

=== SCENE 81 ===
was thin and craggy,
his eyebrows bushy and twisted into witches' locks and a lush growth of
hair sprang from his ears, giving them the tufted look of a lynx's
ears. Beneath his brow was one hollow socket from which a scar ran down
his cheek, carving a diagonal line through his beard. The other eye was
small, pale and cold, an unwinking and remorseless eye. There was a
heavy pistol openly in his trouser band and from the top of his
tattered boot protruded the hilt of a bowie knife.

He returned Scarlett's stare coldly and spat across the rail of the
banister before he spoke. There was contempt in his one eye, not a
personal contempt for her, but for her whole sex.

"Miz Wilkes sont me to work for you," he said shortly. He spoke
rustily, as one unaccustomed to speaking, the words coming slowly and
almost with difficulty. "M' name's Archie."

"I'm sorry but I have no work for you, Mr. Archie."

"Archie's m'fuss name."

"I beg your pardon. What is your last name?"

He spat again. "I reckon that's my bizness," he said. "Archie'll
do."

"I don't care what your last name is! I have nothing for you to
do."

"I reckon you have. Miz Wilkes was upsot about yore wantin' to run
aroun' like a fool by yoreself and she sont me over here to drive
aroun' with you."

"Indeed?" cried Scarlett, indignant both at the man's rudeness and
Melly's meddling.

His one eye met hers with an impersonal animosity. "Yes. A woman's
got no bizness botherin' her men folks when they're tryin' to take keer
of her. If you're bound to gad about, I'll drive you. I hates
niggers—Yankees too."

He shifted his wad of tobacco to the other cheek and, without
waiting for an invitation, sat down on the top step. "I ain't sayin' I
like drivin' women aroun', but Miz Wilkes been good to me, lettin' me
sleep in her cellar, and she sont me to drive you."

"But—" began Scarlett helplessly and then she stopped and looked at
him. After a moment she began to smile. She didn't like the looks of
this elderly desperado but his presence would simplify matters. With
him beside her, she could go to town, drive to the mills, call on
customers. No one could doubt her safety with him and his very
appearance was enough to keep from giving rise to scandal.

"It's a bargain," she said. "That is, if my husband agrees."

After a private conversation with Archie, Frank gave his reluctant
approval and sent word to the livery stable to release the horse and
buggy. He was hurt and disappointed that motherhood had not changed
Scarlett as he had hoped it would but, if she was determined to go back
to her damnable mills, then Archie was a godsend.

So began the relationship that at first startled Atlanta. Archie and
Scarlett were a queerly assorted pair, the truculent dirty old man with
his wooden peg sticking stiffly out over the dashboard and the pretty,
neatly dressed young woman with forehead puckered in an abstracted
frown. They could be seen at all hours and at all places in and near
Atlanta, seldom speaking to each other, obviously disliking each other,
but bound together by mutual need, he of money, she of protection. At
least, said the ladies of the town, it's better than riding around so
brazenly with that Butler man. They wondered curiously where Rhett was
these days, for he had abruptly left town three months before and no
one, not even Scarlett, knew where he was.

Archie was a silent man, never speaking unless spoken to and usually
answering with grunts. Every morning he came from Melanie's cellar and
sat on the front steps of Pitty's house, chewing and spitting until
Scarlett came out and Peter brought the buggy from the stable. Uncle
Peter feared him only a little less than the devil or the Ku Klux and
even Mammy walked silently and

=== SCENE 82 ===
ipped me out with the other prisoners."

He paused and grunted.

"Huh. That was right funny. They put me in jail for killin' and they
let me out with a gun in my hand and a free pardon to do more killin'.
It shore was good to be a free man with a rifle in my hand again. Us
men from Milledgeville did good fightin' and killin'—and a lot of us
was kilt. I never knowed one who deserted. And when the surrender come,
we was free. I lost this here leg and this here eye. But I ain't
sorry."

"Oh," said Scarlett, weakly.

She tried to remember what she had heard about the releasing of the
Milledgeville convicts in that last desperate effort to stem the tide
of Sherman's army. Frank had mentioned it that Christmas of 1864. What
had he said? But her memories of that time were too chaotic. Again she
felt the wild terror of those days, heard the siege guns, saw the line
of wagons dripping blood into the red roads, saw the Home Guard
marching off, the little cadets and the children like Phil Meade and
the old men like Uncle Henry and Grandpa Merriwether. And the convicts
had marched out too, to die in the twilight of the Confederacy, to
freeze in the snow and sleet of that last campaign in Tennessee.

For a brief moment she thought what a fool this old man was, to
fight for a state which had taken forty years from his life. Georgia
had taken his youth and his middle years for a crime that was no crime
to him, yet he had freely given a leg and an eye to Georgia. The bitter
words Rhett had spoken in the early days of the war came back to her,
and she remembered him saying he would never fight for a society that
had made him an outcast. But when the emergency had arisen he had gone
off to fight for that same society, even as Archie had done. It seemed
to her that all Southern men, high or low, were sentimental fools and
cared less for their hides than for words which had no meaning.

She looked at Archie's gnarled old hands, his two pistols and his
knife, and fear pricked

=== SCENE 83 ===
A free hand. All I ask is that you keep that mill running and
deliver my lumber when I want it and as much as I want."

"I'm your man," said Johnnie shortly. "I'll tell Mr. Wellburn I'm
leaving him."

As he rolled off through the crowd of masons and carpenters and hod
carriers Scarlett felt relieved and her spirits rose. Johnnie was
indeed her man. He was tough and hard and there was no nonsense about
him. "Shanty Irish on the make," Frank had contemptuously called him,
but for that very reason Scarlett valued him. She knew that an Irishman
with a determination to get somewhere was a valuable man to have,
regardless of what his personal characteristics might be. And she felt
a closer kinship with him than with many men of her own class, for
Johnnie knew the value of money.

The first week he took over the mill he justified all her hopes, for
he accomplished more with five convicts than Hugh had ever done with
his crew of ten free negroes. More than that, he gave Scarlett greater
leisure than she had had since she came to Atlanta the year before,
because he had no liking for her presence at the mill and said so
frankly.

"You tend to your end of selling and let me tend to my end of
lumbering," he said shortly. "A convict camp ain't any place for a lady
and if nobody else'll tell you so, Johnnie Gallegher's telling you now.
I'm delivering your lumber, ain't I? Well, I've got no notion to be
pestered every day like Mr. Wilkes. He needs pestering. I don't."

So Scarlett reluctantly stayed away from Johnnie's mill, fearing
that if she came too often he might quit and that would be ruinous. His
remark that Ashley needed pestering stung her, for there was more truth
in it than she liked to admit. Ashley was doing little better with
convicts than he had done with free labor, although why, he was unable
to tell. Moreover, he looked as if he were ashamed to be working
convicts and he had little to say to her these days.

Scarlett was worried by the change that was coming over him. There
were gray hairs in his bright head now and a tired slump in his
shoulders. And he seldom smiled. He no longer looked the debonaire
Ashley who had caught her fancy so many years before. He looked like a
man secretly gnawed by a scarcely endurable pain and there was a grim
tight look about his mouth that baffled and hurt her. She wanted to
drag his head fiercely down on her shoulder, stroke the graying hair
and cry: "Tell me what's worrying you! I'll fix it! I'll make it right
for you!"

But his formal, remote air kept her at arm's length.

CHAPTER XLIII

It was one of those rare December days when the sun was almost as
warm as Indian summer. Dry red leaves still clung to the oak in Aunt
Pitty's yard and a faint yellow green still persisted in the dying
grass. Scarlett, with the baby in her arms, stepped out onto the side
porch and sat down in a rocking chair in a patch of sunshine. She was
wearing a new green challis dress trimmed with yards and yards of black
rickrack braid and a new lace house cap which Aunt Pitty had made for
her. Both were very becoming to her and she knew it and took great
pleasure in them. How good it was to look pretty again after the long
months of looking so dreadful!

As she sat rocking the baby and humming to herself, she heard the
sound of hooves coming up the side street and, peering curiously
through the tangle of dead vines on the porch, she saw Rhett Butler
riding toward the house.

He had been away from Atlanta for months, since just after Gerald
died, since long before Ella Lorena was born. She had missed him but
she now wished ardently that there was some way to avoid seeing him. In
fact, the sight of his dark face brought a feeling of guilty panic to
her breast. A matter in which Ashley was concerned lay on her
conscience and she did not wish to discuss it with Rhett, but she knew
he would force the discussion, no matter how disinclined she might
be.

He drew up at the gate and swung lightly to the ground and she
thought, staring nervously at him, that he looked just like an
illustration in a book Wade was always pestering her to read aloud.

"All he needs is earrings and a cutlass between his teeth," she
thought. "Well, pirate or no, he's not going to cut my throat today if
I can help it."

As he came up the walk she called a greeting to him, summoning her
sweetest smile. How lucky that she had on her new dress and the
becoming cap and looked so pretty! As his eyes went swiftly over her,
she knew he thought her pretty, too.

"A new baby! Why, Scarlett, this is a surprise!" he laughed, leaning
down to push the blanket away from Ella Lorena's small ugly face.

"Don't be silly," she said, blushing. "How are you, Rhett? You've
been away a long time."

"So I have. Let me hold the baby, Scarlett. Oh, I know how to hold
babies. I have many strange accomplishments. Well, he certainly looks
like Frank. All except the whiskers, but give him time."

"I hope not. It's a girl."

"A girl? That's better still. Boys are such nuisances. Don't ever
have any more boys, Scarlett."

It was on the tip of her tongue to reply tartly that she never
intended to have any more babies, boys or girls, but she caught herself
in time and smiled, casting about quickly in her mind for some topic of
conversation that would put off the bad moment when the subject she
feared would come up for discussion.

"Did you have a nice trip, Rhett? Where did you go this time?"

"Oh—Cuba—New Orleans—other places. Here, Scarlett, take the baby.
She's beginning to slobber and I can't get to my handkerchief. She's a
fine baby, I'm sure, but she's wetting my shirt bosom."

She took the child back into her lap and Rhett settled himself
lazily on the banister and took a cigar from a silver case.

"You are always going to New Orleans," she said and pouted a little.
"And you never will tell me what you do there."

"I am a hard-working man, Scarlett, and perhaps my business takes me
there."

"Hard-working! You!" she laughed impertinently. "You never worked in
your life. You're too lazy. All you ever do is finance Carpetbaggers in
their thieving and take half the profits and bribe Yankee officials to
let you in on schemes to rob us taxpayers."

He threw back his head and laughed.

"And how you would love to have money enough to bribe officials, so
you could do likewise!"

"The very idea—" She began to ruffle.

"But perhaps you will make enough money to get into bribery on a
large scale some day. Maybe you'll get rich off those convicts you
leased."

"Oh," she said, a little disconcerted, "how did you find out about
my gang so soon?"

"I arrived last night and spent the evening in the Girl of the
Period Saloon, where one hears all the news of the town. It's a
clearing house for gossip. Better than a ladies' sewing circle.
Everyone told me that you'd leased a gang and put that little plug-
ugly, Gallegher, in charge to work them to death."

"That's a lie," she said angrily. "He won't work them to death. I'll
see to that."

"Will you?"

"Of course I will! How can you even insinuate such things?"

"Oh, I do beg your pardon, Mrs. Kennedy! I know your motives are
always above reproach. However, Johnnie Gallegher is a cold little
bully if I ever saw one. Better watch him or you'll be having trouble
when the inspector comes around."

"You tend to your business and I'll tend to mine," she said
indignantly. "And I don't want to talk about convicts any more.
Everybody's been hateful about them. My gang is my own business— And
you haven't told me yet what you do in New Orleans. You go there so
often that everybody says—" She paused. She had not intended to say so
much.

"What do they say?"

"Well—that you have a sweetheart there. That you are going to get
married. Are you, Rhett?"

She had been curious about this for so long that she could not
refrain from asking the point-blank question. A queer little pang of
jealousy jabbed at her at the thought of Rhett getting married,
although why that should be she did not know.

His bland eyes grew suddenly alert and he caught her gaze and held
it until a little blush crept up into her cheeks.

"Would it matter much to you?"

"Well, I should hate to lose your friendship," she said primly and,
with an attempt at disinterestedness, bent down to pull the blanket
closer about Ella Lorena's head.

He laughed suddenly, shortly, and said: "Look at me, Scarlett."

She looked up unwillingly, her blush deepening.

"You can tell your curious friends that when I marry it will be
because I couldn't get the woman I wanted in any other way. And I've
never yet wanted a woman bad enough to marry her."

Now she was indeed confused and embarrassed, for she remembered the
night on this very porch during the siege when he had said: "I am not a
marrying man" and casually suggested that she become his
mistress—remembered, too, the terrible day when he was in jail and was
shamed by the memory. A slow malicious smile went over his face as he
read her eyes.

"But I will satisfy your vulgar curiosity since you ask such pointed
questions. It isn't a sweetheart that takes me to New Orleans. It's a
child, a little boy."

"A little boy!" The shock of this unexpected information wiped out
her confusion.

"Yes, he is my legal ward and I am responsible for him. He's in
school in New Orleans. I go there frequently to see him."

"And take him presents?" So, she thought, that's how he always knows
what kind of presents Wade likes!

"Yes," he said shortly, unwillingly.

"Well, I never! Is he handsome?"

"Too handsome for his own good."

"Is he a nice little boy?"

"No. He's a perfect hellion. I wish he had never been born. Boys are
troublesome creatures. Is there anything else you'd like to know?"

He looked suddenly angry and his brow was dark, as though he already
regretted speaking of the matter at all.

"Well, not if you don't want to tell me any more," she said loftily,
though she was burning for further information. "But I just can't see
you in the role of a guardian," and she laughed, hoping to disconcert
him.

"No, I don't suppose you can. Your vision is pretty limited."

He said no more and smoked his cigar in silence for a while. She
cast about for some remark as rude as his but could think of none.

"I would appreciate it if you'd say nothing of this to anyone," he
said finally. "Though I suppose that asking a woman to keep her mouth
shut is asking the impossible."

"I can keep a secret," she said with injured dignity.

"Can you? It's nice to learn unsuspected things about friends. Now,
stop pouting, Scarlett. I'm sorry I was rude but you deserved it for
prying. Give me a smile and let's be pleasant for a minute or two
before I take up an unpleasant subject."

Oh, dear! she thought. Now, he's going to talk about Ashley and the
mill! and she hastened to smile and show her dimple to divert him.
"Where else did you go, Rhett? You haven't been in New Orleans all this
time, have you?"

"No, for the last month I've been in Charleston. My father
died."

"Oh, I'm sorry."

"Don't be. I'm sure he wasn't sorry to die, and I'm sure I'm not
sorry he's dead."

"Rhett, what a dreadful thing to say!"

"It would be much more dreadful if I pretended to be sorry, when I
wasn't, wouldn't it? There was never any love lost between us. I cannot
remember when the old gentleman did not disapprove of me. I was too
much like his own father and he disapproved heartily of his father. And
as I grew older his disapproval of me became downright dislike, which,
I admit, I did little to change. All the things Father wanted me to do
and be were such boring things. And fina

=== SCENE 84 ===
n what he could, though he hasn't much to give and he
won't take anything from me either—speculator's money is unlucky
money, you see! And the charity of their friends. Your Aunt Eulalie,
she's been very kind. She's one of Mother's best friends, you know.
She's given them clothes and— Good God! My mother on charity!"

It was one of the few times she had ever seen him with his mask off,
his face hard with honest hatred for his father and distress for his
mother.

"Aunt 'Lalie! But, good Heavens, Rhett, she hasn't got anything much
above what I send her!"

"Ah, so that's where it comes from! How ill bred of you, my dear, to
brag of such a thing in the face of my humiliation. You must let me
reimburse you!"

"With pleasure," said Scarlett, her mouth suddenly twisting into a
grin, and he smiled back.

"Ah, Scarlett, how the thought of a dollar does make your eyes
sparkle! Are you sure you haven't some Scotch or perhaps Jewish blood
as well as Irish?"

"Don't be hateful! I didn't mean to throw it in your face about Aunt
'Lalie. But honestly, she thinks I'm made of money. She's always
writing me for more and, God knows, I've got enough on my hands without
supporting all of Charleston. What did your father die of?"

"Genteel starvation, I think—and hope. It served him right. He was
willing to let Mother and Rosemary starve with him. Now that he's dead,
I can help them. I've bought them a house on the Battery and they've
servants to look after them. But of course, they couldn't let it be
known that the money came from me."

"Why not?"

"My dear, surely you know Charleston! You've visited there. My
family may be poor but they have a position to uphold. And they
couldn't uphold it if it were known that gambling money and
speculator's money and Carpetbag money was behind it. No, they gave it
out that Father left an enormous life insurance—that he'd beggared
himself and starved himself to death to keep up the payments, so that
after he died, they'd be provided for. So he is looked upon as an even
greater gentleman of the old school than before...In fact, a
martyr to his family. I hope he's turning in his grave at the knowledge
that Mother and Rosemary are comfortable now, in spite of his efforts...In
a way, I'm sorry he's dead because he wanted to die—was so
glad to die."

"Why?"

"Oh, he really died when Lee surrendered. You know the type. He
never could adjust himself to the new times and spent his time talking
about the good old days."

"Rhett, are all old folks like that?" She was thinking of Gerald and
what Will had said about him.

"Heavens, no! Just look at your Uncle Henry and that old wild cat,
Mr. Merriwether, just to name two. They took a new lease on life when
they marched out with the Home Guard and it seems to me that they've
gotten younger and more peppery ever since. I met old man Merriwether
this morning driving Rene's pie wagon and cursing the horse like an
army mule skinner. He told me he felt ten years younger s

=== SCENE 85 ===
lp themselves.
I'd lend ten thousand dollars without even a note to that old Roman
matron, Mrs. Merriwether. She started with a basket of pies and look at
her now! A bakery employing half a dozen people, old Grandpa happy with
his delivery wagon and that lazy little Creole, Rene, working hard and
liking it...Or that poor devil, Tommy Wellburn, who does two men's
work with half a man's body and does it well or—well, I won't go on
and bore you."

"You do bore me. You bore me to distraction," said Scarlett coldly,
hoping to annoy him and divert him from the ever- unfortunate subject
of Ashley. But he only laughed shortly and refused to take up the
gauntlet.

"People like them are worth helping. But Ashley Wilkes—bah! His
breed is of no use or value in an upside-down world like ours. Whenever
the world up-ends, his kind is the first to perish. And why not? They
don't deserve to survive because they won't fight— don't know how to
fight. This isn't the first time the world's been upside down and it
won't be the last. It's happened before and it'll happen again. And
when it does happen, everyone loses everything and everyone is equal.
And then they all start again at taw, with nothing at all. That is,
nothing except the cunning of their brains and strength of their hands.
But some people, like Ashley, have neither cunning nor strength or,
having them, scruple to use them. And so they go under and they should
go under. It's a natural law and the world is better off without them.
But there are always a hardy few who come through and given time, they
are right back where they were before the world turned over."

"You've been poor! You just said that your father turned you out
without a penny!" said Scarlett, furious. "I should think you'd
understand and sympathize with Ashley!"

"I do understand," said Rhett, "but I'm damned if I sympathize.
After the surrender Ashley had much more than I had when I was thrown
out. At least, he had friends who took him in, whereas I was Ishmael.
But what has Ashley done with himself?"

"If you are comparing him with yourself, you conceited thing, why—
He's not like you, thank God! He wouldn't soil his hands as you do,
making money with Carpetbaggers and Scallawags and Yankees. He's
scrupulous and honorable!"

"But not too scrupulous and honorable to take aid and money from a
woman."

"What else could he have done?"

"Who am I to say? I only know what I did, both when I was thrown out
and nowadays. I only know what other men have done. We saw opportunity
in the ruin of a civilization and we made the most of our opportunity,
some honestly, some shadily, and we are still making the most of it.
But the Ashleys of this world have the same chances and don't take
them. They just aren't smart, Scarlett, and only the smart deserve to
survive."

She hardly heard what he was saying, for now there was coming back
to her the exact memory which had teased her a few minutes before when
he first began speaking. She remembered the cold wind that swept the
orchard of Tara and Ashley standing by a pile of rails, his eyes
looking beyond her. And he had said—what? Some funny foreign name that
sounded like profanity and had talked of the end of the world. She had
not known what he meant then but now bewildered comprehension was
coming to her and with it a sick, weary feeling.

"Why, Ashley said—"

"Yes?"

"Once at Tara he said something about the—a—dusk of the gods and
about the end of the world and some such foolishness."

"Ah, the Gotterdammerung!" Rhett's eyes were sharp with interest.
"And what else?"

"Oh, I don't remember exactly. I wasn't paying much mind. But—
yes—something about the strong coming through and the weak being
winnowed out."

"Ah, so he knows. Then that makes it harder for him. Most of them
don't know and will never know. They'll wonder all their lives where
the lost enchantment has vanished. They'll simply suffer in proud and
incompetent silence. But he understands. He knows he's winnowed
out."

"Oh, he isn't! Not while I've got breath in my body."

He looked at her quietly and his brown face was smooth.

"Scarlett, how did you manage to get his consent to come to Atlanta
and take over the mill? Did he struggle very hard against you?"

She had a quick memory of the scene with Ashley after Gerald's
funeral and put it from her.

"Why, of course not," she replied indignantly. "When I explained to
him that I needed his help because I didn't trust that scamp who was
running the mill and Frank was too busy to help me and I was going
to—well, there was Ella Lorena, you see. He was very glad to help me
out."

"Sweet are the uses of motherhood! So that's how you got around him.
Well, you've got him where you want him now, poor devil, as shackled to
you by obligations as any of your convicts are by their chains. And I
wish you both joy. But, as I said at the beginning of this discussion,
you'll never get another cent out of me for any of your little
unladylike schemes, my double-dealing lady."

She was smarting with anger and with disappointment as well. For
some time she had been planning to borrow more money from Rhett to buy
a lot downtown and start a lumber yard there.

"I can do without your money," she cried. "I'm making money out of
Johnnie Gallegher's mill, plenty of it, now that I don't use free
darkies and I have some money out on mortgages and we are coining cash
at the store from the darky trade."

"Yes, so I heard. How clever of you to rook the helpless and the
widow and the orphan and the ignorant! But if you must steal, Scarlett,
why not steal from the rich and strong instead of the poor and weak?
From Robin Hood on down to now, that's been considered highly
moral."

"Because," said Scarlett shortly, "it's a sight easier and safer to
steal—as you call it—from the poor."

He laughed silently, his shoulders shaking.

"You're a fine honest rogue, Scarlett!"

A rogue! Queer that that term should hurt. She wasn't a rogue, she
told herself vehemently. At least, that wasn't what she wanted to be.
She wanted to be a great lady. For a moment her mind went swiftly down
the years and she saw her mother, moving with a sweet swish of skirts
and a faint fragrance of sachet, her small busy hands tireless in the
service of others, loved, respected, cherished. And suddenly her heart
was sick.

"If you are trying to devil me," she said tiredly, "it's no use. I
know I'm not as—scrupulous as I should be these days. Not as kind and
as pleasant as I was brought up to be. But I can't help it, Rhett.
Truly, I can't. What else could I have done? What would have happened
to me, to Wade, to Tara and all of us if I'd been— gentle when that
Yankee came to Tara? I should have been—but I don't even want to think
of that. And when Jonas Wilkerson was going to take the home place,
suppose I'd been—kind and scrupulous? Where would we all be now? And
if I'd been sweet and simple minded and not nagged Frank about bad
debts we'd—oh, well. Maybe I am a rogue, but I won't be a rogue
forever, Rhett. But during these past years—and even now—what else
could I have done? How else could I have acted? I've felt that I was
trying to row a heavily loaded boat in a storm. I've had so much
trouble just trying to keep afloat that I couldn't be bothered about
things that didn't matter, things I could part with easily and not
miss, like good manners and—well, things like that. I've been too
afraid my boat would be swamped and so I've dumped overboard the things
that seemed least important."

"Pride and honor and truth and virtue and kindliness," he enumerated
silkily. "You are right, Scarlett. They aren't important when a boat is
sinking. But look around you at your friends. Either they are bringing
their boats ashore safely with cargoes intact or they are content to go
down with all flags flying."

"They are a passel of fools," she said shortly. "There's a time for
all things. When I've got plenty of money, I'll be nice as you please,
too. Butter won't melt in my mouth. I can afford to be then."

"You can afford to be—but you won't. It's hard to salvage
jettisoned cargo and, if it is retrieved, it's usually irreparably
damaged. And I fear that when you can afford to fish up the honor and
virtue and kindness you've thrown overboard, you'll find they have
suffered a sea change and not, I fear, into something rich and strange..."

He rose suddenly and picked up his hat.

"You are going?"

"Yes. Aren't you relieved? I leave you to what remains of your
conscience."

He paused and looked down at the baby, putting out a finger for the
child to grip.

"I suppose Frank is bursting with pride?"

"Oh, of course."

"Has a lot of plans for this baby, I suppose?"

"Oh, well, you know how silly men are about their babies."

"Then, tell him," said Rhett and stopped short, an odd look on his
face, "tell him if he wants to see his plans for his child work out,
he'd better stay home at night more often than he's doing."

"What do you mean?"

"Just what I say. Tell him to stay home."

"Oh, you vile creature! To insinuate that poor Frank would—"

"Oh, good Lord!" Rhett broke into a roar of laughter. "I didn't mean
he was running around with women! Frank! Oh, good Lord!"

He went down the steps still laughing.

CHAPTER XLIV

The march afternoon was windy and cold, and Scarlett pulled the lap
robe high under her arms as she drove out the Decatur road toward
Johnnie Gallegher's mill. Driving alone was hazardous these days and
she knew it, more hazardous than ever before, for now the negroes were
completely out of hand. As Ashley had prophesied, there had be

=== SCENE 86 ===
und the
bend of the road.

Just as she was beginning to draw a breath of relief, her heart rose
in her throat with sudden fright, for a huge negro slipped silently
from behind a large oak tree. She was frightened but not enough to lose
her wits and, in an instant, the horse was pulled up and she had
Frank's pistol in her hand.

"What do you want?" she cried with all the sternness she could
muster. The big negro ducked back behind the oak, and the voice that
answered was frightened.

"Lawd, Miss Scarlett, doan shoot Big Sam!"

Big Sam! For a moment she could not take in his words. Big Sam, the
foreman of Tara whom she had seen last in the days of the siege. What
on earth...

"Come out of there and let me see if you are really Sam!"

Reluctantly he slid out of his hiding place, a giant ragged figure,
bare-footed, clad in denim breeches and a blue Union uniform jacket
that was far too short and tight for his big frame. When she saw it was
really Big Sam, she shoved the pistol down into the upholstery and
smiled with pleasure.

"Oh, Sam! How nice to see you!"

Sam galloped over to the buggy, his eyes rolling with joy and his
white teeth flashing, and clutched her outstretched hand with two black
hands as big as hams. His watermelon-pink tongue lapped out, his whole
body wiggled and his joyful contortions were as ludicrous as the
gambolings of a mastiff.

"Mah Lawd, it sho is good ter see some of de fambly agin!" he cried,
scrunching her hand until she felt that the bones would crack. "Hucoome
you got so mean lak, totin' a gun, Miss Scarlett?"

"So many mean folks these days, Sam, that I have to tote it. What on
earth are you doing in a nasty place like Shantytown, you, a
respectable darky? And why haven't you been into town to see me?"

"Law'm, Miss Scarlett, ah doan lib in Shantytown. Ah jes' bidin'
hyah fer a spell. Ah wouldn' lib in dat place for nuthin'. Ah nebber in
mah life seed sech trashy niggers. An' Ah din' know you wuz in 'Lanta.
Ah thought you wuz at Tara. Ah wuz aimin' ter come home ter Tara soon
as Ah got de chance."

"Have you been living in Atlanta ever since the siege?"

"No, Ma'm! Ah been trabelin'!" He released her hand and she
painfully flexed it to see if the bones were intact. "'Member w'en you
seed me las'?"

Scarlett remembered the hot day before the siege began when she and
Rhett had sat in the carriage and the gang of negroes with Big Sam at
their head had marched down the dusty street toward the entrenchments
singing "Go Down, Moses." She nodded.

"Wel, Ah wuked lak a dawg diggin' bresswuks an' fillin' San' bags,
tell de Confedruts lef' 'Lanta. De cap'n gempmum whut had me in charge,
he wuz kilt an' dar warn't nobody ter tell Big Sam whut ter do, so Ah
jes' lay low in de bushes. Ah thought Ah'd try ter git home ter Tara,
but den Ah hear dat all de country roun' T

=== SCENE 87 ===
I hate to see you underrate a fine man like
Mr. Kennedy when, if you knew—"

"India!" said Melanie warningly, her hands clenching on her
sewing.

"I think I know my husband better than you do," said Scarlett, the
prospect of a quarrel, the first open quarrel she had ever had with
India, making her spirits rise and her nervousness depart. Melanie's
eyes caught India's and reluctantly India closed her lips. But almost
instantly she spoke again and her voice was cold with hate.

"You make me sick, Scarlett O'Hara, talking about being protected!
You don't care about being protected! If you did you'd never have
exposed yourself as you have done all these months, prissing yourself
about this town, showing yourself off to strange men, hoping they'll
admire you! What happened to you this afternoon was just what you
deserved and if there was any justice you'd have gotten worse."

"Oh, India, hush!" cried Melanie.

"Let her talk," cried Scarlett. "I'm enjoying it. I always knew she
hated me and she was too much of a hypocrite to admit it. If she
thought anyone would admire her, she'd be walking the streets naked
from dawn till dark."

India was on her feet, her lean body quivering with insult.

"I do hate you," she said in a clear but trembling voice. "But it
hasn't been hypocrisy that's kept me quiet. It's something you can't
understand, not possessing any—any common courtesy, common good
breeding. It's the realization that if all of us don't hang together
and submerge our own small hates, we can't expect to beat the Yankees.
But you—you—you've done all you could to lower the prestige of decent
people—working and bringing shame on a good husband, giving Yankees
and riffraff the right to laugh at us and make insulting remarks about
our lack of gentility. Yankees don't know that you aren't one of us and
have never been. Yankees haven't sense enough to know that you haven't
any gentility. And when you've ridden about the woods exposing yourself
to attack, you've exposed every well-behaved woman in town to attack by
putting temptation in the ways of darkies and mean white trash. And
you've put our men folks' lives in danger because they've got to—"

"My God, India!" cried Melanie and even in her wrath, Scarlett was
stunned to hear Melanie take the Lord's name in vain. "You must hush!
She doesn't know and she—you must hush! You promised—"

"Oh, girls!" pleaded Miss Pittypat, her lips trembling.

"What don't I know?" Scarlett was on her feet, furious, facing the
coldly blazing India and the imploring Melanie.

"Guinea hens," said Archie suddenly and his voice was contemptuous.
Before anyone could rebuke him, his grizzled head went up sharply and
he rose swiftly. "Somebody comin' up the walk. 'Tain't Mr. Wilkes
neither. Cease your cackle."

There was male authority in his voice and the women stood suddenly
silent, anger fading swiftly from their faces as he stumped across the
room to the door.

"Who's thar?" he questioned before the caller even knocked.

"Captain Butler. Let me in."

Melanie was across the floor so swiftly that her hoops swayed up
violently, revealing her pantalets to the knees, and before Archie
could put his hand on the knob she flung the door open. Rhett Butler
stood in the doorway, his black slouch hat low over his eyes, the wild
wind whipping his cape about him in snapping folds. For once his good
manners had deserted him. He neither took off his hat nor spoke to the
others in the room. He had eyes for no one but Melanie and he spoke
abruptly without greeting.

"Where have they gone? Tell me quickly. It's life or death."

Scarlett and Pitty, startled and bewildered, looked at each other in
wonderment and, like a lean old cat, India streaked across the room to
Melanie's side.

"Don't tell him anything," she cried swiftly. "He's a spy, a
Scallawag!"

Rhett did not even favor her with a glance.

"Quickly, Mrs. Wilkes! There may still be time."

Melanie seemed in a paralysis of terror and only stared into his
face.

"What on earth—" began Scarlett.

"Shet yore mouth," directed Archie briefly. "You too, Miss Melly.
Git the hell out of here, you damned Scallawag."

"No, Archie, no!" cried Melanie and she put a shaking hand on
Rhett's arm as though to protect him from Archie. "What has happened?
How did—how did you know?"

On Rhett's dark face impatience fought with courtesy.

"Good God, Mrs. Wilkes, they've all been under suspicion since the
beginning—only they've been too clever—until tonight! How do I know?
I was playing poker tonight with two drunken Yankee captains and they
let it out. The Yankees knew there'd be trouble tonight and they've
prepared for it. The fools have walked into a trap."

For a moment it was as though Melanie swayed under the impact of a
heavy blow and Rhett's arm went around her waist to steady her.

"Don't tell him! He's trying to trap you!" cried India, glaring at
Rhett. "Didn't you hear him say he'd been with Yankee officers
tonight?"

Still Rhett did not look at her. His eyes were bent insistently on
Melanie's white face.

"Tell me. Where did they go? Have they a meeting place?"

Despite her fear and incomprehension, Scarlett thought she had never
seen a blanker, more expressionless face than Rhett's but evidently
Melanie saw something else, something that made her give her trust. She
straightened her small body away from the steadying arm and said
quietly but with a voice that shook:

"Out the Decatur road near Shantytown. They meet in the cellar of
the old Sullivan plantation—the one that's half-burned."

"Thank you. I'll ride fast. When the Yankees come here, none of you
know anything."

He was gone so swiftly, his black cape melting into the night, that
they could hardly realize he had been there at all until they heard the
spattering of gravel and the mad pounding of a horse going off at full
gallop.

"The Yankees coming here?" cried Pitty and, her small feet turning
under her, she collapsed on the sofa, too frightened for tears.

"What's it all about? What did he mean? If you don't tell me I'll go
crazy!" Scarlett laid hands on Melanie and shook her violently as if by
force she could shake an answer from her.

"Mean? It means you've probably been the cause of Ashley's and Mr.
Kennedy's death!" In spite of the agony of fear there was a note of
triumph in India's voice. "Stop shaking Melly. She's going to
faint."

"No, I'm not," whispered Melanie, clutching the back of a chair.

"My God, my God! I don't understand! Kill Ashley? Please, somebody
tell me—"

Archie's voice, like a rusty hinge, cut through Scarlett's
words.

"Set down," he ordered briefly. "Pick up yore sewin'. Sew like
nothin' had happened. For all we know, the Yankees might have been
spyin' on this house since sundown. Set down, I say, and sew."

Trembling they obeyed, even Pitty picking up a sock and holding it
in shaking fingers while her eyes, wide as a frightened child's went
around the circle for an explanation.

"Where is Ashley? What has happened to him, Melly?" cried
Scarlett.

"Where's your husband? Aren't you interested in him?" India's pale
eyes blazed with insane malice as she crumpled and straightened the
torn towel she had been mending.

"India, please!" Melanie had mastered her voice but her white,
shaken face and tortured eyes showed the strain under which she was
laboring. "Scarlett, perhaps we should have told you but—but—you had
been through so much this afternoon that we—that Frank didn't
think—and you were always so outspoken against the Klan—"

"The Klan—"

At first, Scarlett spoke the word as if she had never heard it
before and had no comprehension of its meaning and then:

"The Klan!" she almost screamed it. "Ashley isn't in the Klan! Frank
can't be! Oh, he promised me!"

"Of course, Mr. Kennedy is in the Klan and Ashley, too, and all the
men we know," cried India. "They are men, aren't they? And white men
and Southerners. You should have been proud of him instead of making
him sneak out as though it were something shameful and—"

"You all have known all along and I didn't—"

"We were afraid it would upset you," said Melanie sorrowfully.

"Then that's where they go when they're supposed to be at the
political meetings? Oh, he promised me! Now, the Yankees will come and
take my mills and the store and put him in jail—oh, what did Rhett
Butler mean?"

India's eyes met Melanie's in wild fear. Scarlett rose, flinging her
sewing down.

"If you don't tell me, I'm going downtown and find out. I'll ask
everybody I see until I find—"

"Set," said Archie, fixing her with his eye. "I'll tell you. Because
you went gallivantin' this afternoon and got yoreself into trouble
through yore own fault, Mr. Wilkes and Mr. Kennedy and the other men
are out tonight to kill that thar nigger and that thar white man, if
they can catch them, and wipe out that whole Shantytown settlement. And
if what that Scallawag said is true, the Yankees suspected sumpin' or
got wind somehow and they've sont out troops to lay for them. And our
men have walked into a trap. And if what Butler said warn't true, then
he's a spy and he is goin' to turn them up to the Yankees and they'll
git kilt just the same. And if he does turn them up, then I'll kill
him, if it's the last deed of m' life. And if they ain't kilt, then
they'll all have to light out of here for Texas and lay low and maybe
never come back. It's all yore fault and thar's blood on yore
hands."

Anger wiped out the fear from Melanie's face as she saw
comprehension come slowly across Scarlett's face and then horror follow
swiftly. She rose and put her hand on Scarlett's shoulder.

"Another such word and you go out of this house, Archie," she said
sternly. "It's not her fault. She only did—did what she felt she had
to do. And our men did what they felt they had to do. People must do
what they must do. We don't all think alike or act alike and it's wrong
to—to judge others by ourselves. How can you and India say such cruel
things when her husband as well as mine may be—may be—"

"Hark!" interrupted Archie softly. "Set, Ma'm. Thar's horses."

Melanie sank into a chair, picked up one of Ashley's shirts and,
bowing her head over it, unconsciously began to tear the frills into
small ribbons.

The sound of hooves grew louder as horses trotted up to the house.
There was the jangling of bits and the strain of leather and the sound
of voices. As the hooves stopped in front of the house, one voice rose
above the others in a command and the listeners heard feet going
through the side yard toward the back porch. They felt that a thousand
inimical eyes looked at them through the unshaded front window and the
four women, with fear in their hearts, bent their heads and plied their
needles. Scarlett's heart screamed in her breast: "I've killed Ashley!
I've killed him!" And in that wild moment she did not even think that
she might have killed Frank too. She had no room in her mind for any
picture save that of Ashley, lying at the feet of Yankee cavalrymen,
his fair hair dappled with blood.

As the harsh rapid knocking sounded at the door, she looked at
Melanie and saw come over the small, strained face a new expression, an
expression as blank as she had just seen on Rhett Butler's face, the
bland blank look of a poker player bluffing a game with only two
deuces.

"Archie, open the door," she said quietly.

Slipping his knife into his boot top and loosening the pistol in his
trouser band, Archie stumped over to the door and flung it open. Pitty
gave a little squeak, like a mouse who feels the trap snap down, as she
saw massed in the doorway, a Yankee captain and a squad of bluecoats.
But the others said nothing. Scarlett saw with the faintest feeling of
relief that she knew this officer. He was Captain Tom Jaffery, one of
Rhett's friends. She had sold him lumber to build his house. She knew
him to be a gentleman. Perhaps, as he was a gentleman, he wouldn't drag
them away to prison. He recognized her instantly and, taking off his
hat, bowed, somewhat embarrassed.

"Good evening, Mrs. Kennedy. And which of you ladies is Mrs.
Wilkes?"

"I am Mrs. Wilkes," answered Melanie, rising and for all her
smallness, dignity flowed from her. "And to what do I owe this
intrusion?"

The eyes of the captain flickered quickly abou

=== SCENE 88 ===
espect. If you give
me your word, I will not search the house."

"You have my word. But search if you like. They are at a meeting
downtown at Mr. Kennedy's store."

"They are not at the store. There was no meeting tonight," answered
the captain grimly. "We will wait outside until they return."

He bowed briefly and went out, closing the door behind him. Those in
the house heard a sharp order, muffled by the wind: "Surround the
house. A man at each window and door." There was a tramping of feet.
Scarlett checked a start of terror as she dimly saw bearded faces
peering in the windows at them. Melanie sat down and with a hand that
did not tremble reached for a book on the table. It was a ragged copy
of Les Miserables, that book which caught the fancy of the Confederate
soldiers. They had read it by camp-fire light and took some grim
pleasure in calling it "Lee's Miserables." She opened it at the middle
and began to read in a clear monotonous voice.

"Sew," commanded Archie in a hoarse whisper and the three women,
nerved by Melanie's cool voice, picked up their sewing and bowed their
heads.

How long Melanie read beneath that circle of watching eyes, Scarlett
never knew but it seemed hours. She did not even hear a word that
Melanie read. Now she was beginning to think of Frank as well as
Ashley. So this was the explanation of his apparent calm this evening!
He had promised her he would have nothing to do with the Klan. Oh, this
was just the kind of trouble she had feared would come upon them! All
the work of this last year would go for nothing. All her struggles and
fears and labors in rain and cold had been wasted. And who would have
thought that spiritless old Frank would get himself mixed up in the
hot-headed doings of the Klan? Even at this minute, he might be dead.
And if he wasn't dead and the Yankees caught him, he'd be hanged. And
Ashley, too!

Her nails dug into her palms until four bright-red crescents showed.
How could Melanie read on and on so calmly when Ashley was in danger of
being hanged? When he might be dead? But something in the cool soft
voice reading the sorrows of Jean Valjean steadied her, kept her from
leaping to her feet and screaming.

Her mind fled back to the night Tony Fontaine had come to them,
hunted, exhausted, without money. If he had not reached their house and
received money and a fresh horse, he would have been hanged long since.
If Frank and Ashley were not dead at this very minute, they were in
Tony's position, only worse. With the house surrounded by soldiers they
couldn't come home and get money and clothes without being captured.
And probably every house up and down the street had a similar guard of
Yankees, so they could not apply to friends for aid. Even now they
might be riding wildly through the night, bound for Texas.

But Rhett—perhaps Rhett had reached them in time. Rhett always had
plenty of cash in his pocket. Perhaps he would lend them enough to see
them through. But that was queer. Why should Rhett bother himself about
Ashley's safety? Certainly he disliked him, certainly he professed a
contempt for him. Then why— But this riddle was swallowed up in a
renewed fear for the safety of Ashley and Frank.

"Oh, it's all my fault!" she wailed to herself. "India and Archie
spoke the truth. It's all my fault. But I never thought either of them
was foolish enough to join the Klan! And I never thought anything would
really happen to me! But I couldn't have done otherwise. Melly spoke
the truth.

=== SCENE 89 ===
e Melanie's voice faltered, trailed off and was
silent. She turned her head toward the window and stared as though no
Yankee soldier stared back from behind the glass. The others raised
their heads, caught by her listening pose, and they too listened.

There was a sound of horses' feet and of singing, deadened by the
closed windows and doors, borne away by the wind but still
recognizable. It was the most hated and hateful of all songs, the song
about Sherman's men "Marching through Georgia" and Rhett Butler was
singing it.

Hardly had he finished the first lines when two other voices,
drunken voices, assailed him, enraged foolish voices that stumbled over
words and blurred them together. There was a quick command from Captain
Jaffery on the front porch and the rapid tramp of feet. But even before
these sounds arose, the ladies looked at one another stunned. For the
drunken voices expostulating with Rhett were those of Ashley and Hugh
Elsing.

Voices rose louder on the front walk, Captain Jaffery's curt and
questioning, Hugh's shrill with foolish laughter, Rhett's deep and
reckless and Ashley's queer, unreal, shouting: "What the hell! What the
hell!"

"That can't be Ashley!" thought Scarlett wildly. "He never gets
drunk! And Rhett—why, when Rhett's drunk he gets quieter and
quieter—never loud like that!"

Melanie rose and, with her, Archie rose. They heard the captain's
sharp voice: "These two men are under arrest." And Archie's hand closed
over his pistol butt.

"No," whispered Melanie firmly. "No. Leave it to me." There was in
her face the same look Scarlett had seen that day at Tara when Melanie
had stood at the top of the steps looking down at the dead Yankee, her
weak wrist weighed down by the heavy saber—a gentle and timid soul
nerved by circumstances to the caution and fury of a tigress. She threw
the front door open.

"Bring him in, Captain Butler," she called in a clear tone that bit
with venom. "I suppose you've gotten him intoxicated again. Bring him
in."

From the dark windy walk, the Yankee captain spoke: "I'm sorry, Mrs.
Wilkes, but your husband and Mr. Elsing are under arrest."

"Arrest? For what? For drunkenness? If everyone in Atlanta was
arrested for drunkenness, the whole Yankee garrison would be in jail
continually. Well, bring him in, Captain Butler—that is, if you can
walk yourself."

Scarlett's mind was not working quickly and for a brief moment
nothing made sense. She knew neither Rhett nor Ashley was drunk and she
knew Melanie knew they were not drunk. Yet here was Melanie, usually so
gentle and refined, screaming like a shrew and in front of Yankees too,
that both of them were too drunk to walk.

There was a short mumbled argument, punctuated with curses, and
uncertain feet ascended the stairs. In the doorway appeared Ashley,
white faced, his head lolling, his bright hair tousled, his long body
wrapped from neck to knees in Rhett's black cape. Hugh Elsing and
Rhett, none too steady on their feet, supported him on either side and
it was obvious he would have fallen to the floor but for their aid.
Behind them came the Yankee captain, his face a study of mingled
suspicion and amusement. He stood in the open doorway with his men
peering curiously over his shoulders and the cold wind swept the
house.

Scarlett, frightened, puzzled, glanced at Melanie and back to the
sagging Ashley and then half-comprehension came to her. She started to
cry out: "But he can't be drunk!" and bit back the words. She realized
she was witnessing a play, a desperate play on which lives hinged. She
knew she was not part of it nor was Aunt Pitty but the others were and
they were tossing cues to one another like actors in an oft-rehearsed
drama. She understood only half but she understood enough to keep
silent.

"Put him in the chair," cried Melanie indignantly. "And you, Captain
Butler, leave this house immediately! How dare you show your face here
after getting him in this condition again!"

The two men eased Ashley into a rocker and Rhett, swaying, caught
hold of the back of the chair to steady himself and addressed the
captain with pain in his voice.

"That's fine thanks I get, isn't it? For keeping the police from
getting him and bringing him home and him yelling and trying to claw
me!"

"And you, Hugh Elsing, I'm ashamed of you! What will your poor
mother say? Drunk and out with a—a Yankee-loving Scallawag like
Captain Butler! And, oh, Mr. Wilkes, how could you do such a
thing?"

"Melly, I ain't so very drunk," mumbled Ashley, and with the words
fell forward and lay face down on the table, his head buried in his
arms.

"Archie, take him to his room and put him to bed—as usual," ordered
Melanie. "Aunt Pitty, please run and fix the bed and oo- oh," she
suddenly burst into tears. "Oh, how could he? After he promised!"

Archie already had his arm under Ashley's shoulder and Pitty,
frightened and uncertain, was on her feet when the captain
interposed.

"Don't touch him. He's under arrest. Sergeant!"

As the sergeant stepped into the room, his rifle at trail, Rhett,
evidently trying to steady himself, put a hand on the captain's arm
and, with difficulty, focused his eyes.

"Tom, what you arresting him for? He ain't so very drunk. I've seen
him drunker."

"Drunk be damned," cried the captain. "He can lie in the gutter for
all I care. I'm no policeman. He and Mr. Elsing are under arrest for
complicity in a Klan raid at Shantytown tonight. A nigger and a white
man were killed. Mr. Wilkes was the ringleader in it."

"Tonight?" Rhett began to laugh. He laughed so hard that he sat down
on the sofa and put his head in his hands. "Not tonight, Tom," he said
when he could speak. "These two have been with me tonight—ever since
eight o'clock when they were supposed to be at the meeting."

"With you, Rhett? But—" A frown came over the captain's forehead
and he looked uncertainly at the snoring Ashley and his weeping wife.
"But—where were you?"

"I don't like to say," and Rhett shot a look of drunken cunning at
Melanie.

"You'd better say!"

"Le's go out on the porch and I'll tell you where we were."

"You'll tell me now."

"Hate to say it in front of ladies. If you ladies'll step out of the
room—"

"I won't go," cried Melanie, dabbing angrily at her eyes with her
handkerchief. "I have a right to know. Where was my husband?"

"At Belle Watling's sporting house," said Rhett, looking abashed.
"He was there and Hugh and Frank Kennedy and Dr. Meade and—and a whole
lot of them. Had a party. Big party. Champagne. Girls—"

"At—at Belle Watling's?"

Melanie's voice rose until it cracked with such pain that all eyes
turned frightenedly to her. Her hand went clutching at her bosom and,
before Archie could catch her, she had fainted. Then a hubbub ensued,
Archie picking her up, India running to the kitchen for water, Pitty
and Scarlett fanning her and slapping her wrists, while Hugh Elsing
shouted over and over: "Now you've done it! Now you've done it!"

"Now it'll be all over town," said Rhett savagely. "I hope you're
satisfied, Tom. There won't be a wife in Atlanta who'll speak to her
husband tomorrow."

"Rhett, I had no idea—" Though the chill wind was blowing through
the open door on his back, the captain was perspiring. "Look here! You
take an oath they were at—er—at Belle's?"

"Hell, yes," growled Rhett. "Go ask Belle herself if you don't
believe me. Now, let me carry Mrs. Wilkes to her room. Give her to me,
Archie. Yes, I can carry her. Miss Pitty, go ahead with a lamp."

He took Melanie's limp body from Archie's arms with ease.

"You get Mr. Wilkes to bed, Archie. I don't want to ever lay eyes or
hands on him again after this night."

Pitty's hand trembled so that the lamp was a menace to the safety of
the house but she held it and trotted ahead toward the dark bedroom.
Archie, with a grunt, got an arm under Ashley and raised him.

"But—I've got to arrest these men!"

Rhett turned in the dim hallway.

"Arrest them in the morning then. They can't run away in this
condition—and I never knew before that it was illegal to get drunk in
a sporting house. Good God, Tom, there are fifty witnesses to prove
they were at Belle's."

"There are always fifty witnesses to prove a Southerner was
somewhere he wasn't," said the captain morosely. "You come with me, Mr.
Elsing. I'll parole Mr. Wilkes on the word of—"

"I am Mr. Wilkes' sister. I will answer for his appearance," said
India coldly. "Now, will you please go? You've caused enough trouble
for one night."

"I regret it exceedingly." The captain bowed awkwardly. "I only hope
they can prove their presence at the—er—Miss—Mrs. Watling's house.
Will you tell your brother that he must appear before the provost
marshal tomorrow morning for questioning?"

India bowed coldly and, putting her hand upon the door knob,
intimated silently that his speedy retirement would be welcome. The
captain and the sergeant backed out, Hugh Elsing with them, and she
slammed the door behind them. Without even looking at Scarlett, she
went swiftly to each window and drew down the shade. Scarlett, her
knees shaking, caught hold of the chair in which Ashley had been
sitting to steady herself. Looking down at it, she saw that there was a
dark moist spot, larger than her hand, on the cushion in the back of
the chair. Puzzled, her hand went over it and, to her horror, a sticky
red wetness appeared on her palm.

"India," she whispered, "India, Ashley's—he's hurt."

"You fool! Did you think he was really drunk?"

India snapped down the last shade and started on flying feet for the
bedroom, with Scarlett close behind her, her heart in her throat.
Rhett's big body barred the doorway but, past his shoulder, Scarlett
saw Ashley lying white and still on the bed. Melanie, strangely quick
for one so recently in a faint, was rapidly cutting off his
blood-soaked shirt with embroidery scissors. Archie held the lamp low
over the bed to give light and one of his gnarled fingers was on
Ashley's wrist.

"Is he dead?" cried both girls together.

"No, just fainted from loss of blood. It's through his shoulder,"
said Rhett.

"Why did you bring him here, you fool?" cried India. "Let me get to
him! Let me pass! Why did you bring him here to be arrested?"

"He was too weak to travel. There was nowhere else to bring him,
Miss Wilkes. Besides—do you want him to be an exile like Tony
Fontaine? Do you want a dozen of your neighbors to live in Texas under
assumed names for the rest of their lives? There's a chance that we may
get them all off if Belle—"

"Let me pass!"

"No, Miss Wilkes. There's work for you. You must go for a doctor—
Not Dr. Meade. He's implicated in this and is probably explaining to
the Yankees at this very minute. Get some other doctor. Are you afraid
to go out alone at night?"

"No," said India, her pale eyes glittering. "I'm not afraid." She
caught up Melanie's hooded cape which was hanging on a hook in the
hall. "I'll go for old Dr. Dean." The excitement went out of her voice
as, with an effort, she forced calmness. "I'm sorry I called you a spy
and a fool. I did not understand. I'm deeply grateful for what you've
done for Ashley—but I despise you just the same."

"I appreciate frankness—and I thank you for it." Rhett bowed and
his lip curled down in an amused smile. "Now, go quickly and by back
ways and when you return do not come in this house if you see signs of
soldiers about."

India shot one more quick anguished look at Ashley, and, wrapping
her cape about her, ran lightly down the hall to the back door and let
herself out quietly into the night.

Scarlett, straining her eyes past Rhett, felt her heart beat again
as she saw Ashley's eyes open. Melanie snatched a folded towel from the
washstand rack and pressed it against his streaming shoulder and he
smiled up weakly, reassuringly into her face. Scarlett felt Rhett's
hard penetrating eyes upon her, knew that her heart was plain upon her
face, but she did not care. Ashley was bleeding, perhaps dying and she
who loved him had torn that hole through his shoulder. She wanted to
run to the bed, sink down beside it and clasp him to her but her knees
trembled so that she could not enter the room. Hand at her mouth, she
stared while Melanie packed a fresh towel against his shoulder,
pressing it hard as though she could force back the blood into his
body. But the towel reddened as though by magic.

How could a man bleed so much and still live? But, thank God, there
was no bubble of blood at his lips—oh, those frothy red bubbles,
forerunners of death that she knew so well from the dreadful day of the
battle at Peachtree Creek when the wounded had died on Aunt Pitty's
lawn with bloody mouths.

"Brace up," said Rhett, and there was a hard, faintly jeering note
in his voice. "He won't die. Now, go take the lamp and hold it for Mrs.
Wilkes. I need Archie to run errands."

Archie looked across the lamp at Rhett.

"I ain't takin' no orders from you," he said briefly, shifting his
wad of tobacco to the other cheek.

"You do what he says," said Melanie sternly, "and do it quickly. Do
everything Captain Butler says. Scarlett, take the lamp."

Scarlett went forward and took the lamp, holding it in both hands to
keep from dropping it. Ashley's eyes had closed again. His bare chest
heaved up slowly and sank quickly and the red stream seeped from
between Melanie's small frantic fingers. Dimly she heard Archie stump
across the room to Rhett and heard Rhett's low rapid words. Her mind
was so fixed upon Ashley that of the first half-whispered words of
Rhett, she only heard: "Take my horse...tied outside...ride
like hell."

Archie mumbled some question and Scarlett heard Rhett reply: "The
old Sullivan plantation. You'll find the robes pushed up the biggest
chimney. Burn them."

"Um," grunted Archie.

"And there's two—men in the cellar. Pack them over the horse as
best you can and take them to that vacant lot behind Belle's—the one
between her house and the railroad tracks. Be careful. If anyone sees
you, you'll hang as well as the rest of us. Put them in that lot and
put pistols near them—in their hands. Here—take mine."

Scarlett, looking across the room, saw Rhett reach under his coat
tails and produce two revolvers which Archie took and shoved into his
waist band.

"Fire one shot from each. It's got to appear like a plain case of
shooting. You understand?"

Archie nodded as if he understood perfectly and an unwilling gleam
of respect shone in his cold eye. But understanding was far from
Scarlett. The last half-hour had been so nightmarish that she felt
nothing would ever be plain and clear again. However, Rhett seemed in
perfect command of the bewildering situation and that was a small
comfort.

Archie turned to go and then swung about and his one eye went
questioningly to Rhett's face.

"Him?"

"Yes."

Archie grunted and spat on the floor.

"Hell to pay," he said as he stumped down the hall to the back
door.

Something in the last low interchange of words made a new fear and
suspicion rise up in Scarlett's breast like a chill ever-swelling
bubble. When that bubble broke—

"Where's Frank?" she cried.

Rhett came swiftly across the room to the bed, his big body swinging
as lightly and noiselessly as a cat's.

"All in good time," he said and smiled briefly. "Steady that lamp,
Scarlett. You don't want to burn Mr. Wilkes up. Miss Melly—"

Melanie looked up like a good little soldier awaiting a command and
so tense was the situation it did not occur to her that for the first
time Rhett was calling her familiarly by the name which only family and
old friends used.

"I beg your pardon, I mean, Mrs. Wilkes...."

"Oh, Captain Butler, do not ask my pardon! I should feel honored if
you called me 'Melly' without the Miss! I feel as though you were
my—my brother or—or my cousin. How kind you are and how clever! How
can I ever thank you enough?"

"Thank you," said Rhett and for a moment he looked almost
embarrassed. "I should never presume so far, but Miss Melly," and his
voice was apologetic, "I'm sorry I had to say that Mr. Wilkes was in
Belle Watling's house. I'm sorry to have involved him and the others in
such a—a— But I had to think fast when I rode away from here and that
was the only plan that occurred to me. I knew my word would be accepted
because I have so many friends among the Yankee officers. They do me
the dubious honor of thinking me almost one of them because they know
my—shall we call it my 'unpopularity'?—among my townsmen. And you
see, I was playing poker in Belle's bar earlier in the evening. There
are a dozen Yankee soldiers who can testify to that. And Belle and her
girls will gladly lie themselves black in the face and say Mr. Wilkes
and the others were—upstairs all evening. And the Yankees will believe
them. Yankees are queer that way. It won't occur to them that women
of—their profession are capable of intense loyalty or patriotism. The
Yankees wouldn't take the word of a single nice Atlanta lady as to the
whereabouts of the men who were supposed to be at the meeting tonight
but they will take the word of—fancy ladies. And I think that between
the word of honor of a Scallawag and a dozen fancy ladies, we may have
a chance of getting the men off."

There was a sardonic grin on his face at the last words but it faded
as Melanie turned up to him a face that blazed with gratitude.

"Captain Butler, you are so smart! I wouldn't have cared if you'd
said they were in hell itself tonight, if it saves them! For I know and
every one else who matters knows that my husband was never in a
dreadful place like that!"

"Well—" began Rhett awkwardly, "as a matter of fact, he was at
Belle's tonight."

Melanie drew herself up coldly.

"You can never make me believe such a lie!"

"Please, Miss Melly! Let me explain! When I got out to the old
Sullivan place tonight, I found Mr. Wilkes wounded and with him were
Hugh Elsing and Dr. Meade and old man Merriwether—"

"Not the old gentleman!" cried Scarlett.

"Men are never too old to be fools. And your Uncle Henry—"

"Oh, mercy!" cried Aunt Pitty.

"The others had scattered after the brush with the troops and the
crowd that stuck together had come to the Sullivan place to hide their
robes in the chimney and to see how badly Mr. Wilkes was hurt. But for
his wound, they'd be headed for Texas by now—all of them—but he
couldn't ride far and they wouldn't leave him. It was necessary to
prove that they had been somewhere instead of where they had been, and
so I took them by back ways to Belle Watling's."

"Oh—I see. I do beg your pardon for my rudeness, Captain Butler. I
see now it was necessary to take them there but— Oh, Captain Butler,
people must have seen you going in!"

"No one saw us. We went in through a private back entrance that
opens on the railroad tracks. It's always dark and locked."

"Then how—?"

"I have a key," said Rhett laconically, and his eyes met Melanie's
evenly.

As the full impact of the meaning smote her, Melanie became so
embarrassed that she fumbled with the bandage until it slid off the
wound entirely.

"I did not mean to pry—" she said in a muffled voice, her white
face reddening, as she hastily pressed the towel back into place.

"I regret having to tell a lady such a thing."

"Then it's true!" thought Scarlett with an odd pang. "Then he does
live with that dreadful Watling creature! He does own her house!"

"I saw Belle and explained to her. We gave her a list of the men who
were out tonight and she and her girls will testify that they were all
in her house tonight. Then to make our exit more conspicuous, she
called the two desperadoes who keep order at her place and had us
dragged downstairs, fighting, and through the barroom and thrown out
into the street as brawling drunks who were disturbing the place."

He grinned reminiscently. "Dr. Meade did not make a very convincing
drunk. It hurt his dignity to even be in such a place. But your Uncle
Henry and old man Merriwether were excellent. The stage lost two great
actors when they did not take up the drama. They seemed to enjoy the
affair. I'm afraid your Uncle Henry has a black eye due to Mr.
Merriwether's zeal for his part. He—"

The back door swung open and India entered, followed by old Dr.
Dean, his long white hair tumbled, his worn leather bag bulging under
his cape. He nodded briefly but without words to those present and
quickly lifted the bandage from Ashley's shoulder.

"Too high for the lung," he said. "If it hasn't splintered his
collar bone it's not so serious. Get me plenty of towels, ladies, and
cotton if you have it, and some brandy."

Rhett took the lamp from Scarlett and set it on the table as Melanie
and India sped about, obeying the doctor's orders.

"You can't do anything here. Come into the parlor by the fire." He
took her arm and propelled her from the room. There was a gentleness
foreign to him in both hand and voice. "You've had a rotten day,
haven't you?"

She allowed herself to be led into the front room and though she
stood on the hearth rug in front of the fire she began to shiver. The
bubble of suspicion in her breast was swelling larger now. It was more
than a suspicion. It was almost a certainty and a terrible certainty.
She looked up into Rhett's immobile face and for a moment she could not
speak. Then:

"Was Frank at—Belle Watling's?"

"No."

Rhett's voice was blunt.

"Archie's carrying him to the vacant lot near Belle's. He's dead.
Shot through the head."

CHAPTER XLVI

Few families in the north end of town slept that night for the news
of the disaster to the Klan, and Rhett's stratagem spread swiftly on
silent feet as the shadowy form of India Wilkes slipped through back
yards, whispered urgently through kitchen doors and slipped away into
the windy darkness. And in her path, she left fear and desperate
hope.

From without, houses looked black and silent and wrapped in sleep
but, within, voices whispered vehemently into the dawn. Not only those
involved in the night's raid but every member of the Klan was ready for
flight and in almost every stable along Peachtree Street, horses stood
saddled in the darkness, pistols in holsters and food in saddlebags.
All that prevented a wholesale exodus was India's whispered message:
"Captain Butler says not to run. The roads will be watched. He has
arranged with that Watling creature—" In dark rooms men whispered:
"But why should I trust that damned Scallawag Butler? It may be a
trap!" And women's voices implored: "Don't go! If he saved Ashley and
Hugh, he may save everybody. If India and Melanie trust him—" And they
half trusted and stayed because there was no other course open to
them.

Earlier in the night, the soldiers had knocked at a dozen doors and
those who could not or would not tell where they had been that night
were marched off under arrest. Rene Picard and one of Mrs.
Merriwether's nephews and the Simmons boys and Andy Bonnell were among
those who spent the night in jail. They had been in the ill- starred
foray but had separated from the others after the shooting. Riding hard
for home they were arrested before they learned of Rhett's plan.
Fortunately they all replied, to questions, that where they had been
that night was their own business and not that of any damned Yankees.
They had been locked up for further questioning in the morning. Old man
Merriwether and Uncle Henry Hamilton declared shamelessly that they had
spent the evening at Belle Watling's sporting house and when Captain
Jaffery remarked irritably that they were too old for such goings on,
they wanted to fight him.

Belle Watling herself answered Captai

=== SCENE 90 ===
hey didn't pay for the damage to the
mirrors in the upper hall, she was going to have the law on them. She
kept a respectable house and— Oh, their names? Belle unhesitatingly
reeled off the names of twelve under suspicion, Captain Jaffery smiled
sourly.

"These damned Rebels are as efficiently organized as our Secret
Service," he said. "You and your girls will have to appear before the
provost marshal tomorrow."

"Will the provost make them pay for my mirrors?"

"To hell with your mirrors! Make Rhett Butler pay for them. He owns
the place, doesn't he?"

Before dawn, every ex-Confederate family in town knew everything.
And their negroes, who had been told nothing, knew everything too, by
that black grapevine telegraph system which defies white understanding.
Everyone knew the details of the raid, the killing of Frank Kennedy and
crippled Tommy Wellburn and how Ashley was wounded in carrying Frank's
body away.

Some of the feeling of bitter hatred the women bore Scarlett for her
share in the tragedy was mitigated by the knowledge that her husband
was dead and she knew it and could not admit it and have the poor
comfort of claiming his body. Until morning light disclosed the bodies
and the authorities notified her, she must know nothing. Frank and
Tommy, pistols in cold hands, lay stiffening among the dead weeds in a
vacant lot. And the Yankees would say they killed each other in a
common drunken brawl over a girl in Belle's house. Sympathy ran high
for Fanny, Tommy's wife, who had just had a baby, but no one could slip
through the darkness to see her and comfort her because a squad of
Yankees surrounded the house, waiting for Tommy to return. And there
was another squad about Aunt Pitty's house, waiting for Frank.

Before dawn the news had trickled about that the military inquiry
would take place that day. The townspeople, heavy eyed from
sleeplessness and anxious waiting, knew that the safety of some of
their most prominent citizens rested on three things—the ability of
Ashley Wilkes to stand on his feet and appear before the military
board, as though he suffered nothing more serious than a morning-after
headache, the word of Belle Watling that these men had been in her
house all evening and the word of Rhett Butler that he had been with
them.

The town writhed at these last two! Belle Watling! To owe their
men's lives to her! It was intolerable! Women who had ostentatiously
crossed the street when they saw Belle coming, wondered if she
remembered and trembled for fear she did. The men felt less humiliation
at taking their lives from Belle than the women did, for many of them
thought her a good sort. But they were stung that they must owe lives
and freedom to Rhett Butler, a speculator and a Scallawag. Belle and
Rhett, the town's best-known fancy woman and the town's most hated man.
And they must be under obligation to them.

Another thought that stung them to impotent wrath was the knowledge
that the Yankees and Carpetbaggers would laugh. Oh, how they would
laugh! Twelve of the town's most prominent citizens revealed as
habitual frequenters of Belle Watling's sporting house! Two of them
killed in a fight over a cheap little girl, others ejected from the
place as too drunk to be tolerated even by Belle

=== SCENE 91 ===
eighbors' doors and spread the story. The Yankee ladies were
charmed with it all and laughed until tears ran down their faces. This
was Southern chivalry and gallantry for you! Maybe those women who
carried their heads so high and snubbed all attempts at friendliness
wouldn't be so uppity, now that everyone knew where their husbands
spent their time when they were supposed to be at political meetings.
Political meetings! Well, that was funny!

But even as they laughed, they expressed regret for Scarlett and her
tragedy. After all, Scarlett was a lady and one of the few ladies in
Atlanta who were nice to Yankees. She had already won their sympathy by
the fact that she had to work because her husband couldn't or wouldn't
support her properly. Even though her husband was a sorry one, it was
dreadful that the poor thing should discover he had been untrue to her.
And it was doubly dreadful that his death should occur simultaneously
with the discovery of his infidelity. After all, a poor husband was
better than no husband at all, and the Yankee ladies decided they'd be
extra nice to Scarlett. But the others, Mrs. Meade, Mrs. Merriwether,
Mrs. Elsing, Tommy Wellburn's widow and most of all, Mrs. Ashley
Wilkes, they'd laugh in their faces every time they saw them. That
would teach them a little courtesy.

Much of the whispering that went on in the dark rooms on the north
side of town that night was on this same subject. Atlanta ladies
vehemently told their husbands that they did not care a rap what the
Yankees thought. But inwardly they felt that running an Indian gantlet
would be infinitely preferable to suffering the ordeal of Yankee grins
and not being able to tell the truth about their husbands.

Dr. Meade, beside himself with outraged dignity at the position into
which Rhett had jockeyed him and the others, told Mrs. Meade that, but
for the fact that it would implicate the others, he would rather
confess and be hanged than say he had been at Belle's house.

"It is an insult to you, Mrs. Meade," he fumed.

"But everyone will know you weren't there for—for—"

"The Yankees won't know. They'll have to believe it if we save our
necks. And they'll laugh. The very thought that anyone will believe it
and laugh infuriates me. And it insults you because—my dear, I have

=== SCENE 92 ===
e heard Aunt Pitty's waddling steps crossing
the hall and the door opening. There was the sound of greeting and an
indistinguishable murmur. Some neighbor calling to discuss the funeral
or to bring a blanc mange. Pitty would like that. She had taken an
important and melancholy pleasure in talking to the condolence
callers.

She wondered incuriously who it was and, when a man's voice,
resonant and drawling, rose above Pitty's funereal whispering, she
knew. Gladness and relief flooded her. It was Rhett. She had not seen
him since he broke the news of Frank's death to her, and now she knew,
deep in her heart, that he was the one person who could help her
tonight.

"I think she'll see me," Rhett's voice floated up to her.

"But she is lying down now, Captain Butler, and won't see anyone.
Poor child, she is quite prostrated. She—"

"I think she will see me. Please tell her I am going away tomorrow
and may be gone some time. It's very important."

"But—" fluttered Aunt Pittypat.

Scarlett ran out into the hall, observing with some astonishment
that her knees were a little unsteady, and leaned over the
banisters.

"I'll be down terrectly, Rhett," she called.

She had a glimpse of Aunt Pittypat's plump upturned face, her eyes
owlish with surprise and disapproval. Now it'll be all over town that I
conducted myself most improperly on the day of my husband's funeral,
thought Scarlett, as she hurried back to her room and began smoothing
her hair. She buttoned her black basque up to the chin and pinned down
the collar with Pittypat's mourning brooch. I don't look very pretty
she thought, leaning toward the mirror, too white and scared. For a
moment her hand went toward the lock box where she kept her rouge
hidden but she decided against it. Poor Pittypat would be upset in
earnest if she came downstairs pink and blooming. She picked up the
cologne bottle and took a large mouthful, carefully rinsed her mouth
and then spit into the slop jar.

She rustled down the stairs toward the two who still stood in the
hall, for Pittypat had been too upset by Scarlett's action to ask Rhett
to sit down. He was decorously clad in black, his linen frilly and
starched, and his manner was all that custom demanded from an old
friend paying a call of sympathy on one bereaved. In fact, it was so
perfect that it verged on the burlesque, though Pittypat did not see
it. He was properly apologetic for disturbing Scarlett and regretted
that in his rush of closing up business before leaving town he had been
unable to be present at the funeral.

"Whatever possessed him to come?" wondered Scarlett. "He doesn't
mean a word he's saying."

"I hate to intrude on you at this time but I have a matter of
business to discuss that will not wait. Something that Mr. Kennedy and
I were planning—"

"I didn't know you and Mr. Kennedy had business dealings," said Aunt
Pittypat, almost indignant that some of Frank's activities were unknown
to her.

"Mr. Kennedy was a man of wide interests," said Rhett respectfully.
"Shall we go into the parlor?"

"No!" cried Scarlett, glancing at the closed folding doors. She
could still see the coffin in that room. She hoped she never had to
enter it again. Pitty, for once, took a hint, although with none too
good grace.

"Do use the library. I must—I must go upstairs and get out the
mending. Dear me, I've neglected it so this last week. I declare—"

She went up the stairs with a backward look of reproach which was
noticed by neither Scarlett nor Rhett. He stood aside to let her pass
before him into the library.

"What business did you and Frank have?" she questioned abruptly.

He came closer and whispered. "None at all. I just wanted to get
Miss Pitty out of the way." He paused as he leaned over her. "It's no
good, Scarlett."

"What?"

"The cologne."

"I'm sure I don't know what you mean."

"I'm sure you do. You've been drinking pretty heavily."

"Well, what if I have? Is it any of your business?"

"The soul of courtesy, even in the depths of sorrow. Don't drink
alone, Scarlett. People always find it out and it ruins the reputation.
And besides, it's a bad business, this drinking alone. What's the
matter, honey?"

He led her to the rosewood sofa and she sat down in silence.

"May I close the doors?"

She knew if Mammy saw the closed doors she would be scandalized and
would lecture and grumble about it for days, but it would be still
worse if Mammy should overhear this discussion of drinking, especially
in light of the missing brandy bottle. She nodded and Rhett drew the
sliding doors together. When he came back and sat down beside her, his
dark eyes alertly searching her face, the pall of death receded before
the vitality he radiated and the room seemed pleasant and homelike
again, the lamps rosy and warm.

"What's the matter, honey?"

No one in the world could say that foolish word of endearment as
caressingly as Rhett, even when he was joking, but he did not look as
if he were joking now. She raised tormented eyes to his face and
somehow found comfort in the blank inscrutability she saw there. She
did not know why this should be, for he was such an unpredictable,
callous person. Perhaps it was because, as he often said, they were so
much alike. Sometimes she thought that all the people she had ever
known were strangers except Rhett.

"Can't you tell me?" he took her hand, oddly gentle. "It's more than
old Frank leaving you? Do you need money?"

"Money? God, no! Oh, Rhett, I'm so afraid."

"Don't be a goose, Scarlett, you've never been afraid in your
life."

"Oh, Rhett, I am afraid!"

The words bubbled up faster than she could speak them. She could
tell him. She could tell Rhett anything. He'd been so bad himself that
he wouldn't sit in judgment on her. How wonderful to know someone who
was bad and dishonorable and a cheat and a liar, when all the world was
filled with people who would not lie to save their souls and who would
rather starve than do a dishonorable deed!

"I'm afraid I'll die and go to hell."

If he laughed at her she would die, right then. But he did not
laugh.

"You are pretty healthy—and maybe there isn't any hell after
all."

"Oh, but there is, Rhett! You know there is!"

"I know there is but it's right here on earth. Not after we die.
There's nothing after we die, Scarlett. You are having your hell
now."

"Oh, Rhett, that's blasphemous!"

"But singularly comforting. Tell me, why are you going to hell?"

He was teasing now, she could see the glint in his eyes but she did
not mind. His hands felt so warm and strong, so comforting to cling
to.

"Rhett, I oughtn't to have married Frank. It was wrong. He was
Suellen's beau and he loved her, not me. But I lied to him and told him
she was going to marry Tony Fontaine. Oh, how could I have done
it?"

"Ah, so that was how it came about! I always wondered."

"And then I made him so miserable. I made him do all sorts of things
he didn't want to do, like making people pay their bills when they
really couldn't afford to pay them. And it hurt him so when I ran the
mills and built the saloon and leased convicts. He could hardly hold up
his head for shame. And Rhett, I killed him. Yes, I did! I didn't know
he was in the Klan. I never dreamed he had that much gumption. But I
ought to have known. And I killed him."

"'Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my
hand?'"

"What?"

"No matter. Go on."

"Go on? That's all. Isn't it enough? I married him, I made him
unhappy and I killed him. Oh, my God! I don't see how I could have done
it! I lied to him and I married him. It all seemed so right when I did
it but now I see how wrong it was. Rhett, it doesn't seem like it was
me who did all these things. I was so mean to him but I'm not really
mean. I wasn't raised that way. Mother—" She stopped and swallowed.
She had avoided thinking of Ellen all day but she could no longer blot
out her image.

"I often wondered what she was like. You seemed to me so like your
father."

"Mother was— Oh, Rhett, for the first time I'm glad she's dead, so
she can't see me. She didn't raise me to be mean. She was so kind to
everybody, so good. She'd rather I'd have starved than done this. And I
so wanted to be just like her in every way and I'm not like her one
bit. I hadn't thought of that—there's been so much else to think
about—but I wanted to be like her. I didn't want to be like Pa. I
loved him but he was—so—so thoughtless. Rhett, sometimes I did try so
hard to be nice to people and kind to Frank, but then the nightmare
would come back and scare me so bad I'd want to rush out and just grab
money away from people, whether it was mine or not."

Tears were streaming unheeded down her face and she clutched his
hand so hard that her nails dug into his flesh.

"What nightmare?" His voice was calm and soothing.

"Oh—I forgot you didn't know. Well, just when I would try to be
nice to folks and tell myself that money wasn't everything, I'd go to
bed and dream that I was back at Tara right after Mother died, right
after the Yankees went through. Rhett, you can't imagine—I get cold
when I think about it. I can see how everything is burned and so still
and there's nothing to eat. Oh, Rhett, in my dream I'm hungry
again."

"Go on."

"I'm hungry and everybody, Pa and the girls and the darkies, are
starving and they keep saying over and over: 'We're hungry' and I'm so
empty it hurts, and so frightened. My mind keeps saying: 'If I ever get
out of this, I'll never, never be hungry again' and then the dream goes
off into a gray mist and I'm running, running in the mist, running so
hard my heart's about to burst and something is chasing me, and I can't
breathe but I keep thinking t

=== SCENE 93 ===
causing his death. You are only sorry because you are
afraid of going to hell. Is that right?"

"Well—that sounds so mixed up."

"Your ethics are considerably mixed up too. You are in the exact
position of a thief who's been caught red handed and isn't sorry he
stole but is terribly, terribly sorry he's going to jail."

"A thief—"

"Oh, don't be so literal! In other words if you didn't have this
silly idea that you were damned to hell fire eternal, you'd think you
were well rid of Frank."

"Oh, Rhett!"

"Oh, come! You are confessing and you might as well confess the
truth as a decorous lie. Did your—er—conscience bother you much when
you offered to—shall we say—part with that jewel which is dearer than
life for three hundred dollars?"

The brandy was spinning in her head now and she felt giddy and a
little reckless. What was the use in lying to him? He always seemed to
read her mind.

"I really didn't think about God much then—or hell. And when I did
think—well, I just reckoned God would understand."

"But you don't credit God with understanding why you married
Frank?"

"Rhett, how can you talk so about God when you know you don't
believe there is one?"

"But you believe in a God of Wrath and that's what's important at
present. Why shouldn't the Lord understand? Are you sorry you still own
Tara and there aren't Carpetbaggers living there? Are you sorry you
aren't hungry and ragged?"

"Oh, no!"

"Well, did you have any alternative except marrying Frank?"

"No."

"He didn't have to marry you, did he? Men are free agents. And he
didn't have to let you bully him into doing things he didn't want to,
did he?"

"Well—"

"Scarlett, why worry about it? If you had it to do over again you
would be driven to the lie and he to marrying you. You would still have
run yourself into danger and he would have had to avenge you. If he had
married Sister Sue, she might not have caused his death but she'd
probably have made him twice as unhappy as you did. It couldn't have
happened differently."

"But I could have been nicer to him."

"You could have been—if you'd been somebody else. But you were born
to bully anyone who'll let you do it. The strong were made to bully and
the weak to knuckle under. It's all Frank's fault for not beating you
with a buggy whip...I'm surprised at you, Scarlett, for sprouting
a conscience this late in life. Opportunists like you shouldn't have
them."

"What is an oppor—what did you call it?"

"A person who takes advantage of opportunities."

"Is that wrong?"

"It has always been held in disrepute—especially by those who had
the same opportunities and didn't take them."

"Oh, Rhett, you are joking and I thought you were going to be
nice!"

"I am being nice—for me. Scarlett, darling, you are tipsy. That's
what's the matter with you."

"You dare—"

"Yes, I dare. You are on the verge of what is vulgarly called a
'crying jag' and so I shall change the subject and cheer you up by
telling you some news that will amuse you. In fact, that's why I came
here this evening, to tell you my news before I went away."

"Where are you going?"

"To England and I may be gone for months. Forget your conscience,
Scarlett. I have no intention of discussing your soul's welfare any
further. Don't you want to hear my news?"

"But—" she began feebly and paused. Between the brandy which was
smoothing out the harsh contours of remorse and Rhett's mocking but
comforting words, the pale specter of Frank was receding into shadows.
Perhaps Rhett was right. Perhaps God did understand. She recovered
enough to push the idea from the top of her mind and decide: "I'll
think about it all tomorrow."

"What's your news?" she said with an effort, blowing her nose on his
handkerchief and pushing back the hair that had begun to straggle.

"My news is this," he answered, grinning down at her. "I still want
you more than any woman I've ever seen and now that Frank's gone, I
thought you'd be interested to know it."

Scarlett jerked her hands away from his grasp and sprang to her
feet.

"I—you are the most ill-bred man in the world, coming here at this
time of all times with your filthy—I should have known you'd never
change. And Frank hardly cold! If you had any decency— Will you leave
this—"

"Do be quiet or you'll have Miss Pittypat down here in a minute," he
said, not rising but reaching up and taking both her fists. "I'm afraid
you miss my point."

"Miss your point? I don't miss anything." She pulled against his
grip. "Turn me loose and get out of here. I never heard of such bad
taste. I—"

"Hush," he said. "I am asking you to marry me. Would you be
convinced if I knelt down?"

She said "Oh" breathlessly and sat down hard on the sofa.

She stared at him, her mouth open, wondering if the brandy were
playing tricks on her mind, remembering senselessly his jibing: "My
dear, I'm not a marrying man." She was drunk or he was crazy. But he
did not look crazy. He looked as calm as though he were discussing the
weather, and his smooth drawl fell on her ears with no particular
emphasis.

"I always intended having you, Scarlett, since that first day I saw
you at Twelve Oaks when you threw that vase and swore and proved that
you weren't a lady. I always intended having you, one way or another.
But as you and Frank have made a little money, I know you'll never be
driven to me again with any interesting propositions of loans and
collaterals. So I see I'll have to marry you."

"Rhett Butler, is this one of your vile jokes?"

"I bare my soul and you are suspicious! No, Scarlett, this is a bona
fide honorable declaration. I admit that it's not in the best of taste,
coming at this time, but I have a very good excuse for my lack of
breeding. I'm going away tomorrow for a long time and I fear that if I
wait till I return you'll have married some one else with a little
money. So I thought, why not me and my money? Really, Scarlett, I can't
go all my life, waiting to catch you between husbands."

He meant it. There was no doubt about it. Her mouth was dry as she
assimilated this knowledge and she swallowed and looked into his eyes,
trying to find some clue. They were full of laughter but there was
something else, deep in them, which she had never seen before, a gleam
that defied analysis. He sat easily, carelessly but she felt that he
was watching her as alertly as a cat watches a mouse hole. There was a
sense of leashed power straining beneath his calm that made her draw
back, a little frightened.

He was actually asking her to marry him; he was committing the
incredible. Once she had planned how she would torment him should he
ever propose. Once she had thought that if he ever spoke those words
she would humble him and make him feel her power and take a malicious
pleasure in doing it. Now, he had spoken and the plans did not even
occur to her, for he was no more in her power than he had ever been. In
fact, he held the whip hand of the situation so completely that she was
as flustered as a girl at her first proposal and she could only blush
and stammer.

"I—I shall never marry again."

"Oh, yes, you will. You were born to be married. Why not me?"

"But Rhett, I—I don't love you."

"That should be no drawback. I don't recall that love was prominent
in your other two ventures."

"Oh, how can you? You know I was fond of Frank!"

He said nothing.

"I was! I was!"

"Well, we won't argue that. Will you think over my proposition while
I'm gone?"

"Rhett, I don't like for things to drag on. I'd rather tell you now.
I'm going home to Tara soon and India Wilkes will stay with Aunt
Pittypat. I want to go home for a long spell and—I—I don't ever want
to get married again."

"Nonsense. Why?"

"Oh, well—never mind why. I just don't like being married."

"But, my poor child, you've never really been married. How can you
know? I'll admit you've had bad luck—once for spite and once for
money. Did you ever think of marrying—just for the fun of it?"

"Fun! Don't talk like a fool. There's no fun being married."

"No? Why not?"

A measure of calm had returned and with it all the natural bluntness
which brandy brought to the surface.

"It's fun for men—though God knows why. I never could understand
it. But all a woman gets out of it is something to eat and a lot of
work and having to put up with a man's foolishness—and a baby every
year."

He laughed so loudly that the sound echoed in the stillness and
Scarlett heard the kitchen door open.

"Hush! Mammy has ears like a lynx and it isn't decent to laugh so
soon after—hush laughing. You know it's true. Fun! Fiddle-dee-
dee!"

"I said you'd had bad luck and what you've just said proves it.
You've been married to a boy and to an old man. And into the bargain
I'll bet your mother told you that women must bear 'these things'
because of the compensating joys of motherhood. Well, that's all wrong.
Why not try marrying a fine young man who has a bad reputation and a
way with women? It'll be fun."

"You are coarse and conceited and I think this conversation has gone
far enough. It's—it's quite vulgar."

"And quite enjoyable, too, isn't it? I'll wager you never discussed
the marital relation with a man before, even Charles or Frank."

She scowled at him. Rhett knew too much. She wondered where he had
learned all he knew about women. It wasn't decent.

"Don't frown. Name the day, Scarlett. I'm not urging instant
matrimony because of your reputation. We'll wait the decent interval.
By the way, just how long is a 'decent interval'?"

"I haven't said I'd marry you. It isn't decent to even talk of such
things at such a time."

"I've told you why I'm talking of them. I'm going away tomorrow and
I'm too ardent a lover to restrain my passion any longer. But perhaps
I've been too precipitate in my wooing."

With a suddenness that startled her, he slid off the sofa onto his
knees and with one hand placed delicately over his heart, he recited
rapidly:

"Forgive me for startling you with the impetuosity of my sentiments,
my dear Scarlett—I mean, my dear Mrs. Kennedy. It cannot have escaped
your notice that for some time past the friendship I have had in my
heart for you has ripened into a deeper feeling, a feeling more
beautiful, more pure, more sacred. Dare I name it you? Ah! It is love
which makes me so bold!"

"Do get up," she entreated. "You look such a fool and suppose Mammy
should come in and see you?"

"She would be stunned and incredulous at the first signs of my
gentility," said Rhett, arising lightly. "Come, Scarlett, you are no
child, no schoolgirl to put me off with foolish excuses about decency
and so forth. Say you'll marry me when I come back or, before God, I
won't go. I'll stay around here and play a guitar under your window
every night and sing at the top of my voice and compromise you, so
you'll have to marry me to save your reputation."

"Rhett, do be sensible. I don't want to marry anybody."

"No? You aren't telling me the real reason. It can't be girlish
timidity. What is it?"

Suddenly she thought of Ashley, saw him as vividly as though he
stood beside her, sunny haired, drowsy eyed, full of dignity, so
utterly different from Rhett. He was the real reason she did not want
to marry again, although she had no objections to Rhett and at times
was genuinely fond of him. She belonged to Ashley, forever and ever.
She had never belonged to Charles or Frank, could never really belong
to Rhett. Every part of her, almost everything she had ever done,
striven after, attained, belonged to Ashley, were done because she
loved him. Ashley and Tara, she belonged to them. The smiles, the
laughter, the kisses she had given Charles and Frank were Ashley's,
even though he had never claimed them, would never claim them.
Somewhere deep in her was the desire to keep herself for him, although
she knew he would never take her.

She did not know that her face had changed, that reverie had brought
a softness to her face which Rhett had never seen before. He looked at
the slanting green eyes, wide and misty, and the tender curve of her
lips and for a moment his breath stopped. Then his mouth went down
violently at one corner and he swore with passionate impatience.

"Scarlett O'Hara, you're a fool!"

Before she could withdraw her mind from its far places, his arms
were around her, as sure and hard as on the dark road to Tara, so long
ago. She felt again the rush of helplessness, the sinking yielding, the
surging tide

=== SCENE 94 ===
ing him away in outraged modesty.

"You mustn't! How dare you!"

"Your heart's going like a rabbit's," he said mockingly. "All too
fast for mere fondness I would think, if I were conceited. Smooth your
ruffled feathers. You are just putting on these virginal airs. Tell me
what I shall bring you from England. A ring? What kind would you
like?"

She wavered momentarily between interest in his last words and a
feminine desire to prolong the scene with anger and indignation.

"Oh—a diamond ring—and Rhett, do buy a great big one."

"So you can flaunt it before your poverty-stricken friends and say
'See what I caught!' Very well, you shall have a big one, one so big
that your less-fortunate friends can comfort themselves by whispering
that it's really vulgar to wear such large stones."

He abruptly started off across the room and she followed him,
bewildered, to the closed doors.

"What is the matter? Where are you going?"

"To my rooms to finish packing."

"Oh, but—"

"But, what?"

"Nothing. I hope you have a nice trip."

"Thank you."

He opened the door and walked into the hall. Scarlett trailed after
him, somewhat at a loss, a trifle disappointed as at an unexpected
anticlimax. He slipped on his coat and picked up his gloves and
hat.

"I'll write you. Let me know if you change your mind."

"Aren't you—"

"Well?" He seemed impatient to be off.

"Aren't you going to kiss me good-by?" she whispered, mindful of the
ears of the house.

"Don't you think you've had enough kissing for one evening?" he
retorted and grinned down at her. "To think of a modest, well-
brought-up young woman— Well, I told you it would be fun, didn't
I?"

"Oh, you are impossible!" she cried in wrath, not caring if Mammy
did hear. "And I don't care if you never come back."

She turned and flounced toward the stairs, expecting to feel his
warm hand on her arm, stopping her. But he only pulled open the front
door and a cold draft swept in.

"But I will come back," he said and went out, leaving her on the
bottom step looking at the closed door.

The ring Rhett brought back from England was large indeed, so large
it embarrassed Scarlett to wear it. She loved gaudy and expensive
jewelry but she had an uneasy feeling that everyone was saying, with
perfect truth, that this ring was vulgar. The central stone was a
four-carat diamond and, surrounding it, were a number of emeralds. It
reached to the knuckle of her finger and gave her hand the appearance
of being weighted down. Scarlett had a suspicion that Rhett had gone to
great pains to have the ring made up and, for pure meanness, had
ordered it made as ostentatious as possible.

Until Rhett was back in Atlanta and the ring on her finger she told
no one, not even her family, of her intentions, and when she did
announce her engagement a storm of bitter gossip broke out. Since the
Klan affair Rhett and Scarlett had been, with the exception of the
Yankees and Carpetbaggers, the town's most unpopular citizens. Everyone
had disapproved of Scarlett since the far-away day when she abandoned
the weeds worn for Charlie Hamilton. Their disapproval had grown
stronger because of her unwomanly conduct in the matter of the mills,
her immodesty in showing herself when she was pregnant and so many
other things. But when she brought about the death of Frank and Tommy
and jeopardized the lives of a dozen other men, their dislike flamed
into public condemnation.

As for Rhett, he had enjoyed the town's hatred since his
speculations during the war and he had not further endeared himself to
his fellow citizens by his alliances with the Republicans since then.
But, oddly enough, the fact that he had saved the lives of some of
Atlanta's most prominent men was what aroused the hottest hate of
Atlanta's ladies.

It was not that they regretted their men were still alive. It was
that they bitterly resented owing the men's lives to such a man as
Rhett and to such an embarrassing trick. For months they had writhed
under Yankee laughter and scorn, and the ladies felt and said that if
Rhett really had the good of the Klan at heart he would have managed
the affair in a more seemly fashion. They said he had deliberately
dragged in Belle Watling to put the nice people of the town in a
disgraceful position. And so he deserved neither thanks for rescuing
the men nor forgiveness for his past sins.

These women, so swift to kindness, so tender to the sorrowing, so
untiring in times of stress, could be as implacable as furies to any
renegade who broke one small law of their unwritten code. This code was
simple. Reverence for the Confederacy, honor to the veterans, loyalty
to old forms, pride in poverty, open hands to friends and undying
hatred to Yankees. Between them, Scarlett and Rhett had outraged every
tenet of this code.

The men whose lives Rhett had saved attempted, out of decency and a
sense of gratitude, to keep their women silent but they had little
success. Before the announcement of their coming marriage, the two had
been unpopular enough but people could still be polite to them in a
formal way. Now even that cold courtesy was no longer possible. The
news of their engagement came like an explosion, unexpected and
shattering, rocking the town, and even the mildest- mannered women
spoke their minds heatedly. Marrying barely a year after Frank's death
and she had killed him! And marrying that Butler man who owned a
brothel and who was in with the Yankees and Carpetbaggers in all kinds
of thieving schemes! Separately the two of them could be endured, but
the brazen combination of Scarlett and Rhett was too much to be borne.
Common and vile, both of them! They ought to be run out of town!

Atlanta might perhaps have been more tolerant toward the two if the
news of their engagement had not come at a time when Rhett's
Carpetbagger and Scallawag cronies were more odious in the sight of
respectable citizens than they had ever been before. Public feeling
against the Yankees and all their allies was at fever heat at the very
time when the town learned of the engagement, for the last citadel of
Georgia's resistance to Yankee rule had just fallen. The long campaign
which had begun when Sherman moved southward from above Dalton, four
years before, had finally reached its climax, and the state's
humiliation was complete.

Three years of Reconstruction had passed and they had been three
years of terrorism. Everyone had thought that conditions were already
as bad as they could ever be. But now Georgia was discovering that
Reconstruction at its worst had just begun.

For three years the Federal government had been trying to impose
alien ideas and an alien rule upon Georgia and, with an army to enforce
its commands, it had largely succeeded. But only the power of the
military upheld the new regime. The state was under the Yankee rule but
not by the state's consent. Georgia's leaders had kept on battling for
the state's right to govern itself according to its own ideas. They had
continued resisting all efforts to force them to bow down and accept
the dictates of Washington as their own state law.

Officially, Georgia's government had never capitulated but it had
been a futile fight, an ever-losing fight. It was a fight that could
not win but it had, at least, postponed the inevitable. Already many
other Southern states had illiterate negroes in high public office and
legislatures dominated by negroes and Carpetbaggers. But Georgia, by
its stubborn resistance, had so far escaped this final degradation. For
the greater part of three years, the state's capitol had remained in
the control of white men and Democrats. With Yankee soldiers
everywhere, the state officials could do little but protest and resist.
Their power was nominal but they had at least been able to keep the
state government in the hands of native Georgians. Now even that last
stronghold had fallen.

Just as Johnston and his men had been driven back step by step from
Dalton to Atlanta, four years before, so had the Georgia Democrats been
driven back little by little, from 1865 on. The power of the Federal
government over the state's affairs and the lives of its citizens had
been steadily made greater and greater. Force had been piled on top of
force and military edicts in increasing numbers had rendered the civil
authority more and more impotent. Finally, with Georgia in the status
of a military province, the polls had been ordered thrown open to the
negroes, whether the state's laws permitted it or not.

A week before Scarlett and Rhett announced their engagement, an
election for governor had been held. The Southern Democrats had General
John B. Gordon, one of Georgia's best loved and most honored citizens,
as their candidate. Opposing him was a Republican named Bullock. The
election had lasted three days instead of one. Trainloads of negroes
had been rushed from town to town, voting at every precinct along the
way. Of course, Bullock had won.

If the capture of Georgia by Sherman had caused bitterness, the
final capture of the state's capitol by the Carpetbaggers, Yankees and
negroes caused an intensity of bitterness such as the state had never
known before. Atlanta and Georgia seethed and raged.

And Rhett Butler was a friend of the hated Bullock!

Scarlett, with her usual disregard of all matters not directly under
her nose, had scarcely known an election was being held. Rhett had
taken no part in the election and his relations with the Yankees were
no different from what they had always been. But the fact remained that
Rhett was a Scallawag and a friend of Bullock. And, if the marriage
went through, Scarlett also would be turning Scallawag. Atlanta was in
no mood to be tolerant or charitable toward anyone in the enemy camp
and, the news of the engagement coming when it did, the town remembered
all of the evil things about the pair and none of the good.

Scarlett knew the town was rocking but she did not realize the
extent of public feeling until Mrs. Merriwether, urged on by her church
circle, took it upon herself to speak to her for her own good.

"Because your own dear mother is dead and Miss Pitty, not being a
matron, is not qualified to—er, well, to talk to you upon such a
subject, I feel that I must warn you, Scarlett, Captain Butler is not
the kind of a man for any woman of good family to marry. He is a—"

"He managed to save Grandpa Merriwether's neck and your nephew's,
too."

Mrs. Merriwether swelled. Hardly an hour before she had had an
irritating talk with Grandpa. The old man had remarked that she must
not value his hide very much if she did not feel some gratitude to
Rhett Butler, even if the man was a Scallawag and a scoundrel.

"He only did that as a dirty trick on us all, Scarlett, to embarrass
us in front of the Yankees," Mrs. Merriwether continued. "You know as
well as I do that the man is a rogue. He always has been and now he's
unspeakable. He is simply not the kind of man decent people
receive."

"No? That's strange, Mrs. Merriwether. He was in your parlor often
enough during the war. And he gave Maybelle her white satin wedding
dress, didn't he? Or

=== SCENE 95 ===
d better not decide so hastily?"

No, she didn't mind what anybody said, except Mammy. Mammy's words
were the ones that made her most angry and brought the greatest
hurt.

"Ah has seed you do a heap of things dat would hu't Miss Ellen, did
she know. An' it has done sorrered me a plen'y. But disyere is de wust
yit. Mahyin' trash! Yas'm, Ah said trash! Doan go tellin' me he come
frum fine folkses. Dat doan mek no diffunce. Trash come outer de high
places, same as de low, and he trash! Yas'm, Miss Scarlett, Ah's seed
you tek Mist' Charles 'way frum Miss Honey w'en you din' keer nuthin'
'bout him. An' Ah's seed you rob yo own sister of Mist' Frank. An' Ah's
heshed mah mouf 'bout a heap of things you is done, lak sellin' po'
lumber fer good, an' lyin' 'bout de other lumber gempmums, an' ridin'
roun' by yo'seff, exposin' yo'seff ter free issue niggers an' gettin'
Mist' Frank shot, an' not feedin' dem po' convicts nuff ter keep dey
souls in dey bodies. Ah's done heshed mah mouf, even ef Miss Ellen in
de Promise Lan' wuz sayin' 'Mammy, Mammy! You ain' look affer mah chile
right!' Yas'm. Ah's stood fer all dat but Ah ain' gwine stand fer dis,
Miss Scarlett. You kain mahy wid trash. Not w'ile Ah got breaf in mah
body."

"I shall marry whom I please," said Scarlett coldly. "I think you
are forgetting your place, Mammy."

"An' high time, too! Ef Ah doan say dese wuds ter you, who gwine ter
do it?"

"I've been thinking the matter over, Mammy, and I've decided that
the best thing for you to do is to go back to Tara. I'll give you some
money and—"

Mammy drew herself up with all her dignity.

"Ah is free, Miss Scarlett. You kain sen' me nowhar Ah doan wanter
go. An' w'en Ah goes back ter Tara, it's gwine be w'en you goes wid me.
Ah ain' gwine leave Miss Ellen's chile, an' dar ain' no way in de worl'
ter mek me go. An' Ah ain' gwine leave Miss Ellen's gran'chillun fer no
trashy step-pa ter bring up, needer. Hyah Ah is and hyah Ah stays!"

"I will not have you staying in my house and being rude to Captain
Butler. I am going to marry him and there's no more to be said."

"Dar is plen'y mo' ter be said," retorted Mammy slowly and into her
blurred old eyes there came the light of battle.

"But Ah ain' never thought ter say it ter none of Miss Ellen's
blood. But, Miss Scarlett, lissen ter me. You ain' nuthin' but a mule
in hawse harness. You kin polish a mule's feet an' shine his hide an'
put brass all over his harness an' hitch him ter a fine cah'ige. But he
a mule jes' de same. He doan fool nobody. An' you is jes' de same. You
got silk dresses an' de mills an' de sto' an' de money, an' you give
yo'seff airs lak a fine hawse, but you a mule jes' de same. An' you
ain' foolin' nobody, needer. An' dat Butler man, he come of good stock
and he all slicked up lak a race hawse, but he a mule in hawse harness,
jes' lak you."

Mammy bent a piercing look on her mistress. Scarlett was speechless
and quivering with insult.

"Ef you say you gwine mahy him, you gwine do it, 'cause you is
bullhaided lak yo' pa. But 'member dis, Miss Scarlett, Ah ain' leavin'
you. Ah gwine stay right hyah an' see dis ting thoo."

Without waiting for a reply, Mammy turned and left Scarlett and if
she had said: "Thou shalt see me at Philippi!" her tones would not have
been more ominous.

While they were honeymooning in New Orleans Scarlett told Rhett of
Mammy's words. To her surprise and indignation he laughed at Mammy's
statement about mules in horse harness.

"I have never heard a profound truth expressed so succinctly," he
said. "Mammy's a smart old soul and one of the few people I know whose
respect and good will I'd like to have. But, being a mule, I suppose
I'll never get either from her. She even refused the ten- dollar gold
piece which I, in my groomlike fervor, wished to present her after the
wedding. I've seen so few people who did not melt at the sight of cash.
But she looked me in the eye and thanked me and said she wasn't a free
issue nigger and didn't need my money."

"Why should she take on so? Why should everybody gabble about me
like a bunch of guinea hens? It's my own affair whom I marry and how
often I marry. I've always minded my own business. Why don't other
people mind theirs?"

"My pet, the world can forgive practically anything except people
who mind their own business. But why should you squall like a scalded
cat? You've said often enough that you didn't mind what people said
about you. Why not prove it? You know you've laid yourself open to
criticism so often in small matters, you can't expect to escape gossip
in this large matter. You knew there'd be talk if you married a villain
like me. If I were a low-bred poverty-stricken villain, people wouldn't
be so mad. But a rich, flourishing villain—of course, that's
unforgivable."

"I wish you'd be serious sometimes!"

"I am serious. It's always annoying to the godly when the ungodly
flourish like the green bay tree. Cheer up, Scarlett, didn't you tell
me once that the main reason you wanted a lot of money was so you could
tell everybody to go to hell? Now's your chance."

"But you were the main one I wanted to tell to go to hell," said
Scarlett, and laughed.

"Do you still want to tell me to go to hell?"

"Well, not as often as I used to."

"Do it whenever you like, if it makes you happy."

"It doesn't make me especially happy," said Scarlett and, bending,
she kissed him carelessly. His dark eyes flickered quickly over her
face, hunting for something in her eyes which he did not find, and he
laughed shortly.

"Forget about Atlanta. Forget about the old cats. I brought you to
New Orleans to have fun and I intend that you shall have it."

PART FIVE

CHAPTER XLVIII

She did have fun, more fun than she had had since the spring before
the war. New Orleans was such a strange, glamorous place and Scarlett
enjoyed it with the headlong pleasure of a pardoned life prisoner. The
Carpetbaggers were looting the town, many honest folk were driven from
their homes and did not know where to look for their next meal, and a
negro sat in the lieutenant governor's chair. But the New Orleans Rhett
showed her was the gayest place she had ever seen. The people she met
seemed to have all the money they wanted and no cares at all. Rhett
introduced her to dozens of women, pretty women in bright gowns, women
who had soft hands that showed no signs of hard work, women who laughed
at everything and never talked of stupid serious things or hard times.
And the men she met—how thrilling they were! And how different from
Atlanta men—and how they fought to dance with her, and paid her the
most extravagant compliments as though she were a young belle.

These men had the same hard reckless look Rhett wore. Their eyes
were always alert, like men who have lived too long with danger to be
ever quite careless. They seemed to have no pasts or futures, and they
politely discouraged Scarlett when, to make conversation, she asked
what or where they were before they came to New Orleans. That, in
itself, was strange, for in Atlanta every respectable newcomer hastened
to present his credentials, to tell proudly of his home and family, to
trace the tortuous mazes of relationship that stretched over the entire
South.

But these men were a taciturn lot, picking their words carefully.
Sometimes when Rhett was alone with them and Scarlett in the next room,
she heard laughter and caught fragments of conversation that meant
nothing to her, scraps of words, puzzling names—Cuba and Nassau in the
blockade days, the gold rush and claim jumping, gun running and
filibustering, Nicaragua and William Walker and how he died against a
wall at Truxillo. Once her sudden entrance abruptly terminated a
conversation about what had happened to the members of Quantrill's band
of guerillas, and she caught the names of Frank and Jesse James.

But they were all well mannered, beautifully tailored, and they
evidently admired her, so it mattered little to Scarlett that they
chose to live utterly in the present. What really mattered was that
they were Rhett's friends and had large houses and fine carriages, and
they took her and Rhett driving, invited them to suppers, gave parties
in their honor. And Scarlett like them very well. Rhett was amused when
she told him so.

"I thought you would," he said and laughed.

"Why not?" her suspicions aroused as always by his laughter.

"They're all second-raters, black sheep, rascals. They're all
adventurers or Carpetbag aristocrats. They all made their money
speculating in food like your loving husband or out of dubious
government contracts or in shady ways that won't bear
investigation."

"I don't believe it. You're teasing. They're the nicest people..."

"The nicest people in town are starving," said Rhett. "And living
politely in hovels, and I doubt if I'd be received in those hovels. You
see, my dear, I was engaged in some of my nefarious schemes here during
the war and these people have devilish long memories! Scarlett, you are
a constant joy to me. You unerringly manage to pick the wrong people
and the wrong things."

"But they are your friends!"

"Oh, but I like rascals. My early youth was spent as a gambler on a
river boat and I can understand people like that. But I'm not blind to
what they are. Whereas you"—he laughed again—"you have no instinct
about people, no discrimination between the cheap and the great.
Sometimes, I think that the only great ladies you've ever associated
with were your mother and Miss Melly and neither seems to have made any
impression on you."

"Melly! Why she's as plain as an old shoe and her clothes always
look tacky and she never has two words to say for herself!"

"Spare me your jealousy, Madam. Beauty doesn't make a lady, nor
clothes a great lady!"

"Oh, don't they! Just you wait, Rhett Butler, and I'll show you. Now
that I've—we've got money, I'm going to be the greatest lady you ever
saw!"

"I shall wait with interest," he said.

More exciting than the people she met were the frocks Rhett bought
her, superintending the choice of colors, materials and designs
himself. Hoops were out now, and the new styles were charming with the
skirts pulled back from the front and draped over bustles, and on the
bustles were wreaths of flowers and bows and cascades of lace. She
thought of the modest hoops of the war years and she felt a little
embarrassed at these new skirts which undeniably outlined her abdomen.
And the darling little bonnets that were not really bonnets at all, but
flat little affairs worn over one eye and laden with fruits and
flowers, dancing plumes and fluttering ribbons! (If only Rhett had not
been so silly and burned the false curls she bought to augment her knot
of Indian-straight hair that peeked from the rear of these little
hats!) And the delicate convent-made underwear! How lovely it was and
how many sets she had! Chemises and nightgowns and petticoats of the
finest linen trimmed with dainty embroidery and infinitesimal tucks.
And the satin slippers Rhett bought her! They had heels three inches
high and huge glittering paste buckles on them. And silk stockings, a
dozen pairs and not a one had cotton tops! What riches!

She recklessly bought gifts for the family. A furry St. Bernard
puppy for Wade, who had always longed for one, a Persian kitten for
Beau, a coral bracelet for little Ella, a heavy necklace with moonstone
pendants for Aunt Pitty, a complete set of Shakespeare for Melanie and
Ashley, an elaborate livery for Uncle Peter, including a high silk
coachman's hat with a brush upon it, dress lengths for Dilcey and
Cookie, expensive gifts for everyone at Tara.

"But what have you bought for Mammy?" questioned Rhett, looking over
the pile of gifts spread out on the bed in their hotel room, and
removing the puppy and kitten to the dressing room.

"Not a thing. She was hateful. Why should I bring her a present when
she called us mules?"

"Why should you so resent hearing the truth, my pet? You must bring
Mammy a present. It would break her heart if you didn't—and hearts
like hers are too valuable to be broken."

"I won't take her a thing. She doesn't deserve it."

"Then I'll buy her one. I remember my mammy always said that when
she went to Heaven she wanted a taffeta petticoat so stiff that it
would stand by itself and so rustly that the Lord God would think it
was made of angels' wings. I'll buy Mammy some red taffeta and have an
elegant petticoat made."

"She won't take it from you. She'd die rather than wear it."

"I don't doubt it. But I'll make the gesture just the same."

The shops of New Orleans were so rich and exciting and shopping with
Rhett was an adventure. Dining with him was an adventure too, and one
more thrilling than shopping, for he knew what to order and how it
should be cooked. The wines and liqueurs and champagnes of New Orleans
were new and exhilarating to her, acquainted with only homemade
blackberry and scuppernong vintages and Aunt Pitty's "swoon" brandy;
but oh, the food Rhett ordered! Best of all things in New Orleans was
the food. Remembering the bitter hungry days at Tara and her more
recent penury, Scarlett felt that she could never eat enough of these
rich dishes. Gumboes and shrimp Creole, doves in wine and oysters in
crumbly patties full of creamy sauce, mushrooms and sweetbreads and
turkey livers, fish baked cunningly in oiled paper and limes. Her
appetite never dulled, for whenever she remembered the everlasting
goobers and dried peas and sweet potatoes at Tara, she felt an urge to
gorge herself anew of Creole dishes.

"You eat as though each meal were your last," said Rhett. "Don't
scrape the plate, Scarlett. I'm sure there's more in the kitchen. You
have only to ask the waiter. If you don't stop being such a glutton,
you'll be as fat as the Cuban ladies and then I shall divorce you."

But she only put out her tongue at him and ordered another pastry,
thick with chocolate and stuffed with meringue.

What fun it was to be able to spend as much money as you liked and
not count pennies and feel that you should save them to pay taxes or
buy mules. What fun to be with people who were gay and rich and not
genteelly poor like Atlanta people. What fun to wear rustling brocade
dresses that showed your waist and all your neck and arms and more than
a little of your breast and know that men were admiring you. And what
fun to eat all you wanted without having censorious people say you
weren't ladylike. And what fun to drink all the champagne you pleased.
The first time she drank too much, she was embarrassed when she awoke
the next morning with a splitting headache and an awful memory of
singing "Bonnie Blue Flag" all the way back to the hotel, through the
streets of New Orleans, in an open carriage. She had never seen a lady
even tipsy, and the only drunken woman she had ever seen had been that
Watling creature on the day when Atlanta fell. She hardly knew how to
face Rhett, so great was her humiliation, but the affair seemed only to
amuse him. Everything she did seemed to amuse him, as though she were a
gamboling kitten.

It was exciting to go out with him for he was so handsome. Somehow
she had never given his looks a thought before, and in Atlanta everyone
had been too preoccupied with his shortcomings ever to talk about his
appearance. But here in New Orleans she could see how the eyes of other
women followed him and how they fluttered when he bent over their
hands. The realization that other women were attracted by her husband,
and perhaps envied her, made her suddenly proud to be seen by his
side.

"Why, we're a handsome people," thought Scarlett with pleasure.

Yes, as Rhett had prophesied, marriage could be a lot of fun. Not
only was it fun but she was learning many things. That was odd in
itself, because Scarlett had thought life could teach her no more. Now
she felt like a child, every day on the brink of a new discovery.

First, she learned that marriage with Rhett was a far different
matter from marriage with either Charles or Frank. They had respected
her and been afraid of her temper. They had begged for favors and if it
pleased her, she had bestowed them. Rhett did not fear her and, she
often thought, did not respect her very much either. What he wanted to
do, he did, and if she did not like it, he laughed at her. She did not
love him but he was undoubtedly an exciting person to live with. The
most exciting thing about him was that even in his outbursts of passion
which were flavored sometimes with cruelty, sometimes with irritating
amusement, he seemed always to be holding himself under restraint,
always riding his emotions with a curb bit.

"I guess that's because he isn't really in love with me," she
thought and was content enough with the state of affairs. "I should
hate for him to ever turn completely loose in any way." But still the
thought of the possibility teased her curiosity in an exciting way.

Living with Rhett, she learned many new things about him, and she
had thought she knew him so well. She learned that his voice could be
as silky as a cat's fur one moment and crisp and crackling with oaths
the next. He could tell, with apparent sincerity and approval, stories
of courage and honor and virtue and love in the odd places he had been,
and follow them with ribald stories of coldest cynicism. She knew no
man should tell such stories to his wife but they were entertaining and
they appealed to somet

=== SCENE 96 ===
g others.

He made her play and she had almost forgotten how. Life had been so
serious and so bitter. He knew how to play and swept her along with
him. But he never played like a boy; he was a man and no matter what he
did, she could never forget it. She could not look down on him from the
heights of womanly superiority, smiling as women have always smiled at
the antics of men who are boys at heart.

This annoyed her a little, whenever she thought of it. It would be
pleasant to feel superior to Rhett. All the other men she had known she
could dismiss with a half-contemptuous "What a child!" Her father, the
Tarleton twins with their love of teasing and their elaborate practical
jokes, the hairy little Fontaines with their childish rages, Charles,
Frank, all the men who had paid court to her during the war—everyone,
in fact, except Ashley. Only Ashley and Rhett eluded her understanding
and her control for they were both adults, and the elements of
boyishness were lacking in them.

She did not understand Rhett, nor did she trouble to understand him,
though there were things about him which occasionally puzzled her.
There was the way he looked at her sometimes, when he thought she was
unaware. Turning quickly she frequently caught him watching her, an
alert, eager, waiting look in his eyes.

"Why do you look at me like that?" she once asked irritably. "Like a
cat at a mouse hole!"

But his face had changed swiftly and he only laughed. Soon she
forgot it and did not puzzle her head about it any more, or about
anything concerning Rhett. He was too unpredictable to bother about and
life was very pleasant—except when she thought of Ashley.

Rhett kept her too busy to think of Ashley often. Ashley was hardly
ever in her thoughts during the day but at night when she was tired
from dancing or her head was spinning from too much champagne—then she
thought of Ashley. Frequently when she lay drowsily in Rhett's arms
with the moonlight streaming over the bed, she thought how perfect life
would be if it were only Ashley's arms which held her so closely, if it
were only Ashley who drew her black hair across his face and wrapped it
about his throat.

Once when she was thinking this, she sighed and turned her head
toward the window, and after a moment she felt the heavy arm beneath
her neck become like iron, and Rhett's voice spoke in the stillness:
"May God damn your cheating little soul to hell for all eternity!"

And, getting up, he put on his clothes and left the room despite her
startled protests and questions. He reappeared the next morning as she
was breakfasting in her room, disheveled, quite drunk and in his worst
sarcastic mood, and neither made excuses nor gave an account of his
absence.

Scarlett asked no questions and was quite cool to him, as became an
injured wife, and when she had finished the meal, she dressed under his
bloodshot gaze and went shopping. He was gone when she returned and did
not appear again until time for supper.

It was a silent meal and Scarlett's temper was straining because it
was her last supper in New Orleans and she wanted to do justice to the
crawfish. And she could not enjoy it under his gaze. Nevertheless she
ate a large one, and drank a quantity of champagne. Perhaps it was this
combination that brought back her old nightmare that evening, for she
awoke, cold with sweat, sobbing brokenly. She was back at Tara again
and Tara was desolate. Mother was dead and with her all the strength
and wisdom of the world. Nowhere in the world was there anyone to turn
to, anyone to rely upon. And something terrifying was pursuing her and
she was running, running till her heart was bursting, running in a
thick swimming fog, crying out, blindly seeking that nameless, unknown
haven of safety that was somewhere in the mist about her.

Rhett was leaning over her when she woke, and without a word he
picked her up in his arms like a child and held her close, his hard
muscles comforting, his wordless murmuring soothing, until her sobbing
ceased.

"Oh, Rhett. I was so cold and so hungry and so tired and I couldn't
find it. I ran through the mist and I ran but I couldn't find it."

"Find what, honey?"

"I don't know. I wish I did know."

"Is it your old dream?"

"Oh, yes!"

He gently placed her on the bed, fumbled in the darkness and lit a
candle. In the light his face with bloodshot eyes and harsh lines was
as unreadable as stone. His shirt, opened to the waist, showed a brown
chest covered with thick black hair. Scarlett, still shaking with
fright, thought how strong and unyielding that chest was, and she
whispered: "Hold me, Rhett."

"Darling!" he said swiftly, and picking her up he sat down in a
large chair, cradling her body against him.

"Oh, Rhett, it's awful to be hungry."

"It must be awful to dream of starvation after a seven-course dinner
including that enormous crawfish." He smiled but his eyes were
kind.

"Oh, Rhett, I just run and run and hunt and I can't ever find what
it is I'm hunting for. It's always hidden in the mist. I know if I
could find it, I'd be safe forever and ever and never be cold or hungry
again."

"Is it a person or a thing you're hunting?"

"I don't know. I never thought about it. Rhett, do you think I'll
ever dream that I get there to safety?"

"No," he said, smoothing her tumbled hair, "I don't. Dreams aren't
like that. But I do think that if you get used to being safe and warm
and well fed in your everyday life, you'll stop dreaming that dream.
And, Scarlett, I'm going to see that you are safe."

"Rhett, you are so nice."

"Thanks for the crumbs from your table, Mrs. Dives. Scarlett, I want
you to say to yourself every morning when you wake up: 'I can't ever be
hungry again and nothing can ever touch me so long as Rhett is here and
the United States government holds out.'"

"The United States government?" she questioned, sitting up,
startled, tears still on her cheeks.

"The ex-Confederate money has now become an honest woman. I invested
most of it in government bonds."

"God's nightgown!" cried Scarlett, sitting up in his lap, forgetful
of her recent terror. "Do you mean to tell me you've loaned your money
to the Yankees?"

"At a fair per cent."

"I don't care if it's a hundred percent! You must sell them
immediately. The idea of letting the Yankees have the use of your
money!"

"And what must I do with it?" he questioned with a smile, noting
that her eyes were no longer wide with fright.

"Why—why buy property at Five Points. I'll bet you could buy all of
Five Points with the money you have."

"Thank you, but I wouldn't have Five Points. Now that the
Carpetbagger government has really gotten control of Georgia, there's
no telling what may happen. I wouldn't put anything beyond the swarm of
buzzards that's swooping down on Georgia now from north, east, south
and west. I'm playing along with them, you understand, as a good
Scallawag should do, but I don't trust them. And I'm not putting my
money in real estate. I prefer bonds. You can hide them. You can't hide
real estate very easily."

"Do you think—" she began, paling as she thought of the mills and
store.

"I don't know. But don't look so frightened, Scarlett. Our charming
new governor is a good friend of mine. It's just that times are too
uncertain now and I don't want much of my money tied up in real
estate."

He shifted her to one knee and, leaning back, reached for a cigar
and lit it. She sat with her bare feet dangling, watching the play of
muscles on his brown chest, her terrors forgotten.

"And while we are on the subject of real estate, Scarlett," he said,
"I am going to build a house. You might have bullied Frank into living
in Miss Pitty's house, but not me. I don't believe I could bear her
vaporings three times a day and, moreover, I believe Uncle Peter would
assassinate me before he would let me live under the sacred Hamilton
roof. Miss Pitty can get Miss India Wilkes to stay with her and keep
the bogyman away. When we get back to Atlanta we are going to stay in
the bridal suite of the National Hotel until our house is finished.
Before we left Atlanta I was dickering for that big lot on Peachtree,
the one near the Leyden house. You know the one I mean?"

"Oh, Rhett, how lovely! I do so want a house of my own. A great big
one!"

"Then at last we are agreed on something. What about a white stucco
with wrought-iron work like these Creole houses here?"

"Oh, no, Rhett. Not anything old fashioned like these New Orleans
houses. I know just what I want. It's the newest thing because I saw a
picture of it in—let me see—it was in that Harper's Weekly I was
looking at. It was modeled after a Swiss chalet."

"A Swiss what?"

"A chalet."

"Spell it."

She complied.

"Oh," he said and stroked his mustache.

"It was lovely. It had a high mansard roof with a picket fence on
top and a tower made of fancy shingles at each end. And the towers had
windows with red and blue glass in them. It was so stylish
looking."

"I suppose it had jigsaw work on the porch banisters?"

"Yes."

"And a fringe of wooden scrollwork hanging from the roof of the
porch?"

"Yes. You must have seen one like it."

"I have—but not in Switzerland. The Swiss are a very intelligent
race and keenly alive to architectural beauty. Do you really want a
house like that?"

"Oh, yes!"

"I had hoped that association with me might improve your taste. Why
not a Creole house or a Colonial with six white columns?"

"I tell you I don't want anything tacky and old-fashioned looking.
And inside let's have red wall paper and red velvet portieres over all
the folding doors and oh, lots of expensive walnut furniture and grand
thick carpets and—oh, Rhett, everybody will be pea green when they see
our house!"

"It is very necessary that everyone shall be envious? Well, if you
like they shall be green. But, Scarlett, has it occurred to you that
it's hardly in good taste to furnish the house on so lavish a scale
when everyone is so poor?"

"I want it that way," she said obstinately. "I want to make
everybody who's been mean to me feel bad. And we'll give big receptions
that'll make the whole town wish they hadn't said such nasty
things."

"But who will come to our receptions?"

"Why, everybody, of course."

"I doubt it. The Old Guard dies but it never surrenders."

"Oh, Rhett, how you run on! If you've got money, people always like
you."

"Not Southerners. It's harder for speculators' money to get into the
best parlors than for the camel to go through the needle's eye. And as
for Scallawags—that's you and me, my pet—we'll be lucky if we aren't
spit upon. But if you'd like to try, I'll back you, my dear, and I'm
sure I shall enjoy your campaign intensely. And while we are on the
subject of money, let me make this clear to you. You can have all the
cash you want for the house and all you want for your fal-lals. And if
you like jewelry, you can have it but I'm going to pick it out. You
have such execrable taste, my pet. And anything you want for Wade or
Ella. And if Will Benteen can't make a go of the cotton, I'm willing to
chip in and help out on that white elephant in Clayton County that you
love so much. That's fair enough, isn't it?"

"Of course. You're very generous."

"But listen closely. Not one cent for the store and not one cent for
that kindling factory of yours."

"Oh," said Scarlett, her face falling. All during the honeymoon she
had been thinking how she could bring up the subject of the thousand
dollars she needed to buy fifty feet more of land to enlarge her lumber
yard.

"I thought you always bragged about being broad minded and not
caring what people said about my running a business, and you're just
like every other man—so afraid people will say I wear the pants in the
family."

"There's never going to be any doubt in anybody's mind about who
wears the pants in the Butler family," drawled Rhett. "I don't care
what fools say. In fact, I'm ill bred enough to be proud of having a
smart wife. I want you to keep on running the store and the mills. They
are your children's. When Wade grows up he won't feel right about being
supported by his stepfather, and then he can take over the management.
But not one cent of mine goes into either business."

"Why?"

"Because I don't care to contribute to the support of Ashley
Wilkes."

"Are you going to begin that again?"

"No. But you asked my reasons and I have given them. And another
thing. Don't think you can juggle books on me and lie about how much
your clothes cost and how much it takes to run the house, so that you
can use the money to buy more mules or another mill for Ashley. I
intend to look over and carefully check your expenditures and I know
what things cost. Oh, don't get insulted. You'd do it. I wouldn't put
it beyond you. In fact, I wouldn't put anything beyond you where either
Tara or Ashley is concerned. I don't mind Tara. But I must draw the
line at Ashley. I'm riding you with a slack rein, my pet, but don't
forget that I'm riding with curb and spurs just the same."

CHAPTER XLIX

Mrs. Elsing cocked her ear toward the hall. Hearing Melanie's steps
die away into the kitchen where rattling dishes and clinking silverware
gave promise of refreshments, she turned and spoke softly to the ladies
who sat in a circle in the parlor, their sewing baskets in their
laps.

"Personally, I do not intend to call on Scarlett now or ever," she
said, the chill elegance of her face colder than usual.

The other members of the Ladies' Sewing Circle for the Widows and
Orphans of the Confederacy eagerly laid down their needles and edged
their rocking chairs closer. All the ladies had been bursting to
discuss Scarlett and Rhett but Melanie's presence prevented it. Just
the day before, the couple had returned from New Orleans and they were
occupying the bridal suite at the National Hotel.

"Hugh says that I must call out of courtesy for the way Captain
Butler saved his life," Mrs. Elsing continued. "And poor Fanny sides
with him and says she will call too. I said to her 'Fanny,' I said, 'if
it wasn't for Scarlett, Tommy would be alive this minute. It is an
insult to his memory to call.' And Fanny had no better sense than to
say, 'Mother, I'm not calling on Scarlett. I'm calling on Captain
Butler. He tried his best to save Tommy and it wasn't his fault if he
failed.'"

"How silly young people are!" said Mrs. Merriwether. "Call, indeed!"
Her stout bosom swelled indignantly as she remembered Scarlett's rude
reception of her advice on marrying Rhett. "My Maybelle is just as
silly as your Fanny. She says she and Rene will call, because Captain
Butler kept Rene from getting hanged. And I said if it hadn't been for
Scarlett exposing herself, Rene would never have been in any danger.
And Father Merriwether intends to call and he talks like he was in his
dotage and says he's grateful to that scoundrel, even if I'm not. I
vow, since Father Merriwether was in that Watling creature's house he
has acted in a disgraceful way. Call, indeed! I ce

=== SCENE 97 ===
art
enough to run her mill."

"Melly!" moaned a chorus of voices.

Mrs. Elsing's head jerked up and she started toward the door. With
her hand on the knob of the front door, she stopped and turned.

"Melly," she said and her voice softened, "honey, this breaks my
heart. I was your mother's best friend and I helped Dr. Meade bring you
into this world and I've loved you like you were mine. If it were
something that mattered it wouldn't be so hard to hear you talk like
this. But about a woman like Scarlett O'Hara who'd just as soon do you
a dirty turn as the next of us—"

Tears had started in Melanie's eyes at the first words Mrs. Elsing
spoke, but her face hardened when the old lady had finished.

"I want it understood," she said, "that any of you who do not call
on Scarlett need never, never call on me."

There was a loud murmur of voices, confusion as the ladies got to
their feet. Mrs. Elsing dropped her sewing box on the floor and came
back into the room, her false fringe jerking awry.

"I won't have it!" she cried. "I won't have it! You are beside
yourself, Melly, and I don't hold you responsible. You shall be my
friend and I shall be yours. I refuse to let this come between us."

She was crying and somehow, Melanie was in her arms, crying too, but
declaring between sobs that she meant every word she said. Several of
the other ladies burst into tears and Mrs. Merriwether, trumpeting
loudly into her handkerchief, embraced both Mrs. Elsing and Melanie.
Aunt Pitty, who had been a petrified witness to the whole scene,
suddenly slid to the floor in what was one of the few real fainting
spells she had ever had. Amid the tears and confusion and kissing and
scurrying for smelling salts and brandy, there was only one calm face,
one dry pair of eyes. India Wilkes took her departure unnoticed by
anyone.

Grandpa Merriwether, meeting Uncle Henry Hamilton in the Girl of the
Period Saloon several hours later, related the happenings of the
morning which he had heard from Mrs. Merriweather. He told it with
relish for he was delighted that someone had the courage to face down
his redoubtable daughter-in-law. Certainly, he had never had such
courage.

"Well, what did the pack of silly fools finally decide to do?" asked
Uncle Henry irritably.

"I dunno for sure," said Grandpa, "but it looks to me like Melly won
hands down on this go-round. I'll bet they'll all call, at least once.
Folks set a store by that niece of yours, Henry."

"Melly's a fool and the ladies are right. Scarlett is a slick piece
of baggage and I don't see why Charlie ever married her," said Uncle
Henry gloomily. "But Melly was right too, in a way. It's only decent
that the families of the men Captain Butler saved should call. When you
come right down to it, I haven't got so much against Butler. He showed
himself a fine man that night he saved our hides. It's Scarlett who
sticks under my tail like a cocklebur. She's a sight too smart for her
own good. Well, I've got to call. Scallawag or not, Scarlett is my
niece by marriage, after all. I was aiming to call this afternoon."

"I'll go with you, Henry. Dolly will be fit to be tied when she
hears I've gone. Wait till I get one more drink."

"No, we'll get a drink off Captain Butler. I'll say this for him, he
always has good licker."


Rhett had said that the Old Guard would never surrender and he was
right. He knew how little significance there was to the few calls made
upon them, and he knew why the calls were made. The families of the men
who had been in the ill-starred Klan foray did call first, but called
with obvious infrequency thereafter. And they did not invite the Rhett
Butlers to their homes.

Rhett said they would not have come at all, except for fear of
violence at the hands of Melanie. Where he got this idea, Scarlett did
not know but she dismissed it with the contempt it deserved. For what
possible influence could Melanie have on people like Mrs. Elsing and
Mrs. Merriwether? That they did not call again worried her very little;
in fact, their absence was hardly noticed, for her suite was crowded
with guests of another type. "New people," established Atlantians
called them, when they were not calling them something less polite.

There were many "new people" staying at the National Hotel who, like
Rhett and Scarlett, were waiting for their houses to be completed. They
were gay, wealthy people, very much like Rhett's New Orleans friends,
elegant of dress, free with their money, vague as to their antecedents.
All the men were Republicans and were "in Atlanta on business connected
with the state government." Just what the business was, Scarlett did
not know and did not trouble to learn.

Rhett could have told her exactly what it was—the same business
that buzzards have with dying animals. They smelled death from afar and
were drawn unerringly to it, to gorge themselves. Government of Georgia
by its own citizens was dead, the state was helpless and the
adventurers were swarming in.

The wives of Rhett's Scallawag and Carpetbagger friends called in
droves and so did the "new people" she had met when she sold lumber for
their homes. Rhett said that, having done business with them, she
should receive them and, having received them, she found them pleasant
company. They wore lovely clothes and never talked about the war or
hard times, but confined the conversation to fashions, scandals and
whist. Scarlett had never played cards before and she took to whist
with joy, becoming a good player in a short time.

Whenever she was at the hotel there was a crowd of whist players in
her suite. But she was not often in her suite these days, for she was
too busy with the building of her new house to be bothered with
callers. These days she did not much care whether she had callers or
not. She wanted to delay her social activities until the day when the
house was finished and she could emerge as the mistress of Atlanta's
largest mansion, the hostess of the town's most elaborate
entertainments.

Through the long warm days she watched her red stone and gray
shingle house rise grandly, to tower above any other house on Peachtree
Street. Forgetful of the store and the mills, she spent her time on the
lot, arguing with carpenters, bickering with masons, harrying the
contractor. As the walls went swiftly up she thought with satisfaction
that, when finished, it would be larger and finer looking than any
other house in town. It would be even more imposing than the near-by
James residence which had just been purchased for the official mansion
of Governor Bullock.

The governor's mansion was brave with jigsaw work on banisters and
eaves, but the intricate scrollwork on Scarlett's house put the mansion
to shame. The mansion had a ballroom, but it looked like a billiard
table compared with the enormous room that covered the entire third
floor of Scarlett's house. In fact, her house had more of everything
than the mansion, or any other house in town for that matter, more
cupolas and turrets and towers and balconies and lightning rods and far
more windows with colored panes.

A veranda encircled the entire house, and four flights of steps on
the four sides of the building led up to it. The yard was wide and
green and scattered about it were rustic iron benches, an iron
summerhouse, fashionably called a "gazebo" which, Scarlett had been
assured, was of pure Gothic design, and two large iron statues, one a
stag and the other a mastiff as large as a Shetland pony. To Wade and
Ella, a little dazzled by the size, splendor and fashionable dark gloom
of their new home, these two metal animals were the only cheerful
notes.

Within, the house was furnished as Scarlett had desired, with thick
red carpeting which ran from wall to wall, red velvet portieres and the
newest of highly varnished black-walnut furniture, carved wherever
there was an inch for carving and upholstered in such slick horsehair
that ladies had to deposit themselves thereon with great care for fear
of sliding off. Everywhere on the walls were gilt-framed mirrors and
long pier glasses—as many, Rhett said idly, as there were in Belle
Watling's establishment. Interspread were steel engravings in heavy
frames, some of them eight feet long, which Scarlett had ordered
especially from New York. The walls were covered with rich dark paper,
the ceilings were high and the house was always dim, for the windows
were overdraped with plum-colored plush hangings that shut out most of
the sunlight.

All in all it was an establishment to take one's breath away and
Scarlett, stepping on the soft carpets and sinking into the embrace of
the deep feather beds, remembered the cold floors and the straw-
stuffed bedticks of Tara and was satisfied. She thought it the most
beautiful and most elegantly furnished house she had ever seen, but
Rhett said it was a nightmare. However, if it made her happy, she was
welcome to it.

"A stranger without being told a word about us would know this house
was built with ill-gotten gains," he said. "You know, Scarlett, money
ill come by never comes to good and this house is proof of the axiom.
It's just the kind of house a profiteer would build."

But Scarlett, abrim with pride and happiness and full of plans for
the entertainments she would give when they were thoroughly settled in
the house, only pinched his ear playfully and said: "Fiddle- dee-dee!
How you do run on!"

She knew, by now, that Rhett loved to take her down a peg, and would
spoil her fun whenever he could, if she lent an attentive ear to his
jibes. Should she take him seriously, she would be forced to quarrel
with him and she did not care to match swords, for she always came off
second best. So she hardly ever listened to anything he said, and what
she was forced to hear she tried to turn off as a joke. At least, she
tried for a while.

During their honeymoon and for the greater part of their stay at the
National Hotel, they had lived together with amiability. But scarcely
had they moved into the new house and Scarlett gathered her new friends
about her, when sudden sharp quarrels sprang up between them. They were
brief quarrels, short lived because it was impossible to keep a quarrel
going with Rhett, who remained coolly indifferent to her hot words and
waited his chance to pink her in an unguarded spot. She quarreled;
Rhett did not. He only stated his unequivocal opinion of herself, her
actions, her house and her new friends. And some of his opinions were
of such a nature that she could no longer ignore them and treat them as
jokes.

For instance when she decided to change the name of "Kennedy's
General Store" to something more edifying, she asked him to think of a
title that would include the word "emporium." Rhett suggested "Caveat
Emptorium," assuring her that it would be a title most in keeping with
the type of goods sold in the store. She thought it had an imposing
sound and even went so far as to have the sign painted, when Ashley
Wilkes, embarrassed, translated the real meaning. And Rhett had roared
at her rage.

And there was the way he treated Mammy. Mammy had never yielded an
inch from her stand that Rhett was a mule in horse harness. She was
polite but cold to Rhett. She always called him "Cap'n Butler," never
"Mist' Rhett." She never even dropped a curtsy when Rhett presented her
with the red petticoat and she never wore it either. She kept Ella and
Wade out of Rhett's way whenever she could, despite the fact that Wade
adored Uncle Rhett and Rhett was obviously fond of the boy. But instead
of discharging Mammy or being short and stern with her, Rhett treated
her with the utmost deference, with far more courtesy than he treated
any of the ladies of Scarlett's recent acquaintance. In fact, with more
courtesy than he treated Scarlett herself. He always asked Mammy's
permission to take Wade riding and consulted with her before he bought
Ella dolls. And Mammy was hardly polite to him.

Scarlett felt that Rhett should be firm with Mammy, as became the
head of the house, but Rhett only laughed and said that Mammy was the
real head of the house.

He infuriated Scarlett by saying coolly that he was preparing to be
very sorry for her some years hence, when the Republican rule was gone
from Georgia and the Democrats back in power.

"When the Democrats get a governor and a legislature of their own,
all your new vulgar Republican friends will be wiped off the chess
board and sent back to minding bars and emptying slops where they
belong. And you'll be left out on the end of a limb, with never a
Democratic friend or a Republican either. Well, take no thought of the
morrow."

Scarlett laughed, and with some justice, for at that time, Bullock
was safe in the governor's chair, twenty-seven negroes were in the
legislature and thousands of the Democratic voters of Georgia were
disfranchised.

"The Democrats will never get back. All they do is make Yankees
madder and put off the day when they could get back. All they do is
talk big and run around at night Ku Kluxing."

"They will get back. I know Southerners. I know Georgians. They are
a tough and bullheaded lot. If they've got to fight another war to get
back, they'll fight another war. If they've got to buy black votes like
the Yankees have done, then they will buy black votes. If they've got
to vote ten thousand dead men like the Yankees did, every corpse in
every cemetery in Georgia will be at the polls. Things are going to get
so bad under the benign rule of our good friend Rufus Bullock that
Georgia is going to vomit him up.

"Rhett, don't use such vulgar words!" cried Scarlett. "You talk like
I wouldn't be glad to see the Democrats come back! And you know that
isn't so! I'd be very glad to see them back. Do you think I like to see
these soldiers hanging around, reminding me of— do you think I
like—why, I'm a Georgian, too! I'd like to see the Democrats get back.
But they won't. Not ever. And even if they did, how would that affect
my friends? They'd still have their money, wouldn't they?"

"If they kept their money. But I doubt the ability of any of them to
keep money more than five years at the rate they're spending. Easy
come, easy go. Their money won't do them any good. Any more than my
money has done you any good. It certainly hasn't made a horse out of
you yet, has it, my pretty mule?"

The quarrel which sprang from this last remark lasted for days.
After the fourth day of Scarlett's sulks and obvious silent demands for
an apology, Rhett went to New Orleans, taking Wade with him, over
Mammy's protests, and he stayed away until Scarlett's tantrum had
passed. But the sting of not humbling him remained with her.

When he came back from New Orleans, cool and bland, she swallowed
her anger as best she could, pushing it into the back of her mind to be
thought of at some later date. She did not want to bother with anything
unpleasant now. She wanted to be happy for her mind was full of the
first party she would give in the new house. It would be an enormous
night reception with palms and an orchestra and all the porches
shrouded in canvas, and a collation that made her mouth water in
anticipation. To it she intended to invite everyone she had ever known
in Atlanta, all the old friends and all the new and charming ones she
had met since returning from her honeymoon. The excitement of the party
banished, for the most part, the memory of Rhett's barbs and she was
happy, happier than she had been in years as she planned her
reception.

Oh, what fun it was to be rich! To give parties and never count the
cost! To buy the most expensive furniture and dresses and food and
never think about the bills! How marvelous to be able to send tidy
checks to Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie in Charleston, and to Will at
Tara! Oh, the jealous fools who said money wasn't everything! How
perverse of Rhett to say that it had done nothing for her!


Scarlett issued cards of invitation to all her friends and
acquaintances, old and new, even those she did not like. She did not
except even Mrs. Merriwether who had been almost rude when she called
on her at the National Hotel or Mrs. Elsing who had been cool to
frigidness. She invited Mrs. Meade and Mrs. Whiting who she knew
disliked her and who she knew would be embarrassed because they did not
have the proper clothes to wear to so elegant a function. For
Scarlett's housewarming, or "crush," as it was fashionable to call such
evening parties, half-reception, half- ball, was by far the most
elaborate affair Atlanta had ever seen.

That night the house and canvas-covered veranda were filled with
guests who drank her champagne punch and ate her patties and creamed
oysters and danced to the music of the orchestra that was carefully
screened by a wall of palms and rubber plants. But none of those whom
Rhett had termed the "Old Guard" were present except Melanie and
Ashley, Aunt Pitty and Uncle Henry, Dr. and Mrs. Meade and Grandpa
Merriwether.

Many of the Old Guard had reluctantly decided to attend the "crush."
Some had accepted because of Melanie's attitude, others because they
felt they owed Rhett a debt for saving their lives and those of their
relatives. But, two days before the function, a rumor went about
Atlanta that Governor Bullock had been invited. The Old Guard signified
their disapproval by a sheaf of cards, regretting their inability to
accept Scarlett's kind invitation. And the small group of old friends
who did attend took their departure, embarrassed but firm, as soon as
the governor entered Scarlett's house.

Scarlett was so bewildered and infuriated at these slights that the
party was utterly ruined for her. Her elegant "crush"! She had planned
it so lovingly and so few old friends and no old enemies had been there
to see how wonderful it was! After the last guest had gone home at
dawn, she would have cried and stormed had she not been afraid that
Rhett would roar with laughter, afraid that she would read "I told you
so" in his dancing black eyes, even if he did not speak the words. So
she swallowed her wrath with poor grace and pretended indifference.

Only to Melanie, the next morning, did she permit herself the luxury
of exploding.

"You insulted me, Melly Wilkes, and you made Ashley and the others
insult me! You know they'd have never gone home so soon if you hadn't
dragged them. Oh, I saw you! Just when I started to bring Governor
Bu

=== SCENE 98 ===
carlett, I didn't mean to hurt your feelings or to criticize.
Everybody thinks differently and everybody's got a right to their own
opinion. Now, dear, I love you and you know I love you and nothing you
could ever do would make me change. And you still love me, don't you? I
haven't made you hate me, have I? Scarlett, I couldn't stand it if
anything ever came between us—after all we've been through together!
Say it's all right."

"Fiddle-dee-dee, Melly, what a tempest you make in a teapot," said
Scarlett grudgingly, but she did not throw off the hand that stole
around her waist.

"Now, we're all right again," said Melanie pleasedly but she added
softly, "I want us to visit each other just like we always did,
darling. Just you let me know what days Republicans and Scallawags are
coming to see you and I'll stay at home on those days."

"It's a matter of supreme indifference to me whether you come or
not," said Scarlett, putting on her bonnet and going home in a huff.
There was some satisfaction to her wounded vanity in the hurt look on
Melanie's face.


In the weeks that followed her first party, Scarlett was hard put to
keep up her pretense of supreme indifference to public opinion. When
she did not receive calls from old friends, except Melanie and Pitty
and Uncle Henry and Ashley, and did not get cards to their modest
entertainments, she was genuinely puzzled and hurt. Had she not gone
out of her way to bury old hatchets and show these people that she bore
them no ill will for their gossiping and backbiting? Surely they must
know that she didn't like Governor Bullock any more than they did but
that it was expedient to be nice to him. The idiots! If everybody would
be nice to the Republicans, Georgia would get out of the fix she was in
very quickly.

She did not realize then that with one stroke she had cut forever
any fragile tie that still bound her to the old days, to old friends.
Not even Melanie's influence could repair the break of that gossamer
thread. And Melanie, bewildered, broken hearted but still loyal, did
not try to repair it. Even had Scarlett wanted to turn back to old
ways, old friends, there was no turning back possible now. The face of
the town was set against her as stonily as granite. The hate that
enveloped the Bullock regime enveloped her too, a hate that had little
fire and fury in it but much cold implacability. Scarlett had cast her
lot with the enemy and, whatever her birth and family connections, she
was now in the category of a turncoat, a nigger lover, a traitor, a
Republican— and a Scallawag.

After a miserable while, Scarlett's pretended indifference gave way
to the real thing. She had never been one to worry long over the
vagaries of human conduct or to be cast down for long if one line of
action failed. Soon she did not care what the Merriwethers, the
Elsings, the Whitings, the Bonnells, the Meades and others thought of
her. At least, Melanie called, bringing Ashley, and Ashley was the one
who mattered the most. And there were other people in Atlanta who would
come to her parties, other people far more congenial than those
hide-bound old hens. Any time she wanted to fill her house with guests,
she could do so and these guests would be far more entertaining, far
more handsomely dressed than those prissy, strait-laced old fools who
disapproved of her.

These people were newcomers to Atlanta. Some of them were
acquaintances of Rhett, some associated with him in those mysterious
affairs which he referred to as "mere business, my pet." Some were
couples Scarlett had met when she was living at the National Hotel and
some were Governor Bullock's appointees.

The set with which she was now moving was a motley crew. Among them
were the Gelerts who had lived in a dozen different states and who
apparently had left each one hastily upon detection of their swindling
schemes; the Conningtons whose connection with the Freedmen's

=== SCENE 99 ===
up permanent residence in the town they had fought
so hard to capture. At first, strangers in a strange town, they were
glad to accept invitations to the lavish entertainments of the wealthy
and hospitable Mrs. Butler, but they soon drifted out of her set. They
were good people and they needed only a short acquaintance with
Carpetbaggers and Carpetbag rule to become as resentful of them as the
native Georgians were. Many became Democrats and more Southern than the
Southerners.

Other misfits in Scarlett's circle remained there only because they
were not welcome elsewhere. They would have much preferred the quiet
parlors of the Old Guard, but the Old Guard would have none of them.
Among these were the Yankee schoolmarms who had come South imbued with
the desire to uplift the Negro and the Scallawags who had been born
good Democrats but had turned Republican after the surrender.

It was hard to say which class was more cordially hated by the
settled citizenry, the impractical Yankee schoolmarms or the
Scallawags, but the balance probably fell with the latter. The
schoolmarms could be dismissed with, "Well, what can you expect of
nigger-loving Yankees? Of course they think the nigger is just as good
as they are!" But for those Georgians who had turned Republican for
personal gain, there was no excuse.

"Starving is good enough for us. It ought to be good enough for
you," was the way the Old Guard felt. Many ex-Confederate soldiers,
knowing the frantic fear of men who saw their families in want, were
more tolerant of former comrades who had changed political colors in
order that their families might eat. But not the women of the Old
Guard, and the women were the implacable and inflexible power behind
the social throne. The Lost Cause was stronger, dearer now in their
hearts than it had ever been at the height of its glory. It was a
fetish now. Everything about it was sacred, the graves of the men who
had died for it, the battle fields, the torn flags, the crossed sabres
in their halls, the fading letters from the front, the veterans. These
women gave no aid, comfort or quarter to the late enemy, and now
Scarlett was numbered among the enemy.

In this mongrel society thrown together by the exigencies of the
political situation, there was but one thing in common. That was money.
As most of them had never had twenty-five dollars at one time in their
whole lives, previous to the war, they were now embarked on an orgy of
spending such as Atlanta had never seen before.

With the Republicans in the political saddle the town entered into
an era of waste and ostentation, with the trappings of refinement
thinly veneering the vice and vulgarity beneath. Never before had the
cleavage of the very rich and the very poor been so marked. Those on
top took no thought for those less fortunate. Except for the negroes,
of course. They must have the very best. The best of schools and
lodgings and clothes and amusements, for they were the power in
politics and every negro vote counted. But as for the recently
impoverished Atlanta people, they could starve and drop in the streets
for all the newly rich Republicans cared.

On the crest of this wave of vulgarity, Scarlett rode triumphantly,
newly a bride, dashingly pretty in her fine clothes, with Rhett's money
solidly behind her. It was an era that suited her, crude, garish,
showy, full of over-dressed women, over-furnished houses, too many
jewels, too many horses, too much food, too much whisky. When Scarlett
infrequently stopped to think about the matter she knew that none of
her new associates could be called ladies by Ellen's strict standards.
But she had broken with Ellen's standards too many times since that
far-away day when she stood in the parlor at Tara and decided to be
Rhett's mistress, and she did not often feel the bite of conscience
now.

Perhaps these new friends were not, strictly speaking, ladies and
gentlemen but like Rhett's New Orleans friends, they were so much fun!
So very much more fun than the subdued, churchgoing,
Shakespeare-reading friends of her earlier Atlanta days. And, except
for her brief honeymoon interlude, she had not had fun in so long. Nor
had she had any sense of security. Now secure, she wanted to dance, to
play, to riot, to gorge on foods and fine wine, to deck herself in
silks and satins, to wallow on soft feather beds and fine upholstery.
And she did all these things. Encouraged by Rhett's amused tolerance,
freed now from the restraints of her childhood, freed even from that
last fear of poverty, she was permitting herself the luxury she had
often dreamed—of doing exactly what she pleased and telling people who
didn't like it to go to hell.

To her had come that pleasant intoxication peculiar to those whose
lives are a deliberate slap in the face of organized society—the
gambler, the confidence man, the polite adventuress, all those who
succeed by their wits. She said and did exactly what she pleased and,
in practically no time, her insolence knew no bounds.

She did not hesitate to display arrogance to her new Republican and
Scallawag friends but to no class was she ruder or more insolent than
the Yankee officers of the garrison and their families. Of all the
heterogeneous mass of people who had poured into Atlanta, the army
people alone she refused to receive or tolerate. She even went out of
her way to be bad mannered to them. Melanie was not alone in being
unable to forget what a blue uniform meant. To Scarlett, that uniform
and those gold buttons would always mean the fears of the siege, the
terror of flight, the looting and burning, the desperate poverty and
the grinding work at Tara. Now that she was rich and secure in the
friendship of the governor and many prominent Republicans, she could be
insulting to every blue uniform she saw. And she was insulting.

Rhett once lazily pointed out to her that most of the male guests
who assembled under their roof had worn that same blue uniform not so
long ago, but she retorted that a Yankee didn't seem like a Yankee
unless he had on a blue uniform. To which Rhett replied: "Consistency,
thou art a jewel," and shrugged.

Scarlett, hating the bright hard blue they wore, enjoyed snubbing
them all the more because it so bewildered them. The garrison families
had a right to be bewildered for most of them were quiet, well-bred
folk, lonely in a hostile land, anxious to go home to the North, a
little ashamed of the riffraff whose rule they were forced to
uphold—an infinitely better class than that of Scarlett's associates.
Naturally, the officers' wives were puzzled that the dashing Mrs.
Butler took to her bosom such women as the common red- haired Bridget
Flaherty and went out of her way to slight them.

But even the ladies whom Scarlett took to her bosom had to endure
much from her. However, they did it gladly. To them, she not only
represented wealth and elegance but the old regime, with its old names,
old families, old traditions with which they wished ardently to
identify themselves. The old families they yearned after might have
cast Scarlett out but the ladies of the new aristocracy did not know
it. They only knew that Scarlett's father had been a great slave owner,
her mother a Robillard of Savannah and her husband was Rhett Butler of
Charleston. And this was enough for them. She was their opening wedge
into the old society they wished to enter, the society which scorned
them, would not return calls and bowed frigidly in churches. In fact,
she was more than their wedge into society. To them, fresh from obscure
beginnings, she WAS society. Pinchbeck ladies themselves, they no more
saw through Scarlett's pinchbeck pretensions than she herself did. They
took her at her own valuation and endured much at her hands, her airs,
her graces, her tempers, her arrogance, her downright rudeness and her
frankness about their shortcomings.

They were so lately come from nothing and so uncertain of themselves
they were doubly anxious to appear refined and feared to show their
temper or make retorts in kind, lest they be considered unladylike. At
all costs they must be ladies. They pretended to great delicacy,
modesty and innocence. To hear them talk one would have thought they
had no legs, natural functions or knowledge of the wicked world. No one
would have thought that red-haired Bridget Flaherty, who had a
sun-defying white skin and a brogue that could be cut with a butter
knife, had stolen her father's hidden hoard to come to America to be
chambermaid in a New York hotel. And to observe the delicate vapors of
Sylvia (formerly Sadie Belle) Connington and Mamie Bart, no one would
have suspected that the first grew up above her father's saloon in the
Bowery and waited on the bar at rush times, and that the latter, so it
was said, had come out of one of her husband's own brothels. No, they
were delicate sheltered creatures now.

The men, though they had made money, learned new ways less easily or
were, perhaps, less patient with the demands of the new gentility. They
drank heavily at Scarlett's parties, far too heavily, and usually after
a reception there were one or more unexpected guests who stayed the
night. They did not drink like the men of Scarlett's girlhood. They
became sodden, stupid, ugly or obscene. Moreover, no matter how many
spittoons she might put out in view, the rugs always showed signs of
tobacco juice on the mornings after.

She had a contempt for these people but she enjoyed them. Because
she enjoyed them, she filled the house with them. And because of her
contempt, she told them to go to hell as often as they annoyed her. But
they stood it.

They even stood Rhett, a more difficult matter, for Rhett saw
through them and they knew it. He had no hesitation about stripping
them verbally, even under his own roof, always in a manner that left
them no reply. Unashamed of how he came by his fortune, he pretended
that they, too, were unashamed of their beginnings and he seldom missed
an opportunity to remark upon matters which, by common consent,
everyone felt were better left in polite obscurity.

There was never any knowing when he would remark affably, over a
punch cup: "Ralph, if I'd had any sense I'd have made my money selling
gold-mine stocks to widows and orphans, like you, instead of
blockading. It's so much safer." "Well, Bill, I see you have a new span
of horses. Been selling a few thousand more bonds for nonexistent
railroads? Good work, boy!" "Congratulations, Amos, on landing that
state contract. Too bad you had to grease so many palms to get it."

The ladies felt that he was odiously, unendurably vulgar. The men
said, behind his back, that he was a swine and a bastard. New Atlanta
liked Rhett no better than old Atlanta had done and he made as little
attempt to conciliate the one as he had the other. He went his way,
amused, contemptuous, impervious to the opinions of those about him, so
courteous that his courtesy was an affront in itself. To Scarlett, he
was still an enigma but an enigma about which she no longer bothered
her head. She was convinced that nothing ever pleased him or ever would
please him, that he either wanted something badly and didn't have it,
or never had wanted anything and so didn't care about anything. He
laughed at everything she did, encouraged her extravagances and
insolences, jeered at her pretenses—and paid the bills.

CHAPTER L

Rhett never deviated from his smooth, imperturbable manners, even in
their most intimate moments. But Scarlett never lost the old feeling
that he was watching her covertly, knew that if she turned her head
suddenly she would surprise in his eyes that speculative, waiting look,
that look of almost terrible patience that she did not understand.

Sometimes, he was a very comfortable person to live with, for all
his unfortunate habit of not permitting anyone in his presence to act a
lie, palm off a pretense or indulge in bombast. He listened to her talk
of the store and the mills and the saloon, the convicts and the cost of
feeding them, and gave shrewd hard-headed advice. He had untiring
energy for the dancing and parties she loved and an unending supply of
coarse stories with which he regaled her on their infrequent evenings
alone when the table was cleared and brandy and coffee before them. She
found that he would give her anything she desired, answer any question
she asked as long as she was forthright, and refuse her anything she
attempted to gain by indirection, hints and feminine angling. He had a
disconcerting habit of seeing through her and laughing rudely.

Contemplating the suave indifference with which he generally treated
her, Scarlett frequently wondered, but with no real curiosity, why he
had married her. Men married for love or a home and children or money
but she knew he had married her for none of these things. He certainly
did not love her. He referred to her lovely house as an architectural
horror and said he would rather live in a well-regulated hotel than a
home. And he never once hinted about children as Charles and Frank had
done. Once when trying to coquet with him she asked why he married her
and was infuriated when he replied with an amused gleam in his eyes: "I
married you to keep you for a pet, my dear."

No, he hadn't married her for any of the usual reasons men marry
women. He had married her solely because he wanted her and couldn't get
her any other way. He had admitted as much the night he proposed to
her. He had wanted her, just as he had wanted Belle Watling. This was
not a pleasant thought. In fact, it was a barefaced insult. But she
shrugged it off as she had learned to shrug off all unpleasant facts.
They had made a bargain and she was quite pleased with her side of the
bargain. She hoped he was equally pleased but she did not care very
much whether he was or not.

But one afternoon when she was consulting Dr. Meade about a
digestive upset, she learned an unpleasant fact which she could not
shrug off. It was with real hate in her eyes that she stormed into her
bedroom at twilight and told Rhett that she was going to have a
baby.

He was lounging in a silk dressing gown in a cloud of smoke and his
eyes went sharply to her face as she spoke. But he said nothing. He
watched her in silence but there was a tenseness about his pose, as he
waited for her next words, that was lost on her. Indignation and
despair had claimed her to the exclusion of all other thoughts.

"You know I don't want any more children! I never wanted any at all.
Every time things are going right with me I have to

=== SCENE 100 ===
ed slightly and his eyes became blank.

"Well, why not give it to Miss Melly? Didn't you tell me she was so
misguided as to want another baby?"

"Oh, I could kill you! I won't have it, I tell you, I won't!"

"No? Pray continue."

"Oh, there are things to do. I'm not the stupid country fool I used
to be. Now, I know that a woman doesn't have to have children if she
doesn't want them! There are things—"

He was on his feet and had her by the wrist and there was a hard,
driving fear in his face.

"Scarlett, you fool, tell me the truth! You haven't done
anything?"

"No, I haven't, but I'm going to. Do you think I'm going to have my
figure ruined all over again, just when I've gotten my waist line down
and am having a good time."

"Where did you get this idea? Who's been telling you things?"

"Mamie Bart—she—"

"The madam of a whore house would know such tricks. That woman never
puts foot in this house again, do you understand? After all, it is my
house and I'm the master of it. I do not even want you to speak to her
again."

"I'll do as I please. Turn me loose. Why should you care?"

"I don't care whether you have one child or twenty, but I do care if
you die."

"Die? Me?"

"Yes, die. I don't suppose Mamie Bart told you the chances a woman
takes when she does a thing like that?"

"No," said Scarlett reluctantly. "She just said it would fix things
up fine."

"By God, I will kill her!" cried Rhett and his face was black with
rage. He looked down into Scarlett's tear-stained face and some of the
wrath faded but it was still hard and set. Suddenly he picked her up in
his arms and sat down in the chair, holding her close to him, tightly,
as if he feared she would get away from him.

"Listen, my baby, I won't have you take your life in your hands. Do
you hear? Good God, I don't want children any more than you do, but I
can support them. I don't want to hear any more foolishness out of you,
and if you dare try to—Scarlett, I saw a girl die that way once. She
was only a—well, but she was a pretty sort at that. It's not an easy
way to die. I—"

"Why, Rhett!" she cried, startled out of her misery at the emotion
in his voice. She had never seen him so moved. "Where—who—"

"In New Orleans—oh, years ago. I was young and impressionable." He
bent his head suddenly and buried his lips in her hair. "You'll have
your baby, Scarlett, if I have to handcuff you to my wrist for the next
nine months."

She sat up in his lap and stared into his face with frank curiosity.
Under her gaze it was suddenly smooth and bland as though wiped clear
by magic. His eyebrows were up and the corner of his mouth was
down.

"Do I mean so much to you?" she questioned, dropping her
eyelids.

He gave her a level look as though estimating how much coquetry was
behind the question. Reading the true meaning of her demeanor, he made
casual answer.

"Well, yes. You see, I've invested a good deal of money in you, and
I'd hate to lose it."

* * * * *

Melanie came out of Scarlett's room, weary from the strain but happy
to tears at the birth of Scarlett's daughter. Rhett stood tensely in
the hall, surrounded by cigar butts which had burned holes in the fine
carpet.

"You can go in now, Captain Butler," she said shyly.

Rhett went swiftly past her into the room and Melanie had a brief
glimpse of him bending over the small naked baby in Mammy's lap before
Dr. Meade shut the door. Melanie sank into a chair, her face pinkening
with embarrassment that she had unintentionally witnessed so intimate a
scene.

"Ah!" she thought. "How sweet! How worried poor Captain Butler has
been! And he did not take a single drink all this time! How nice of
him. So many gentlemen are so intoxicated by the time their babies are
born. I fear he needs a drink badly. Dare I suggest it? No, that would
be very forward of me."

She sank gratefully into a chair, her back, which always ached these
days, feeling as though it would break in two at the waist line. Oh,
how fortunate Scarlett was to have Captain Butler just outside her door
while the baby was being born! If only she had had Ashley with her that
dreadful day Beau came she would not have suffered half so much. If
only that small girl behind those closed doors were hers and not
Scarlett's! Oh, how wicked I am, she thought guiltily. I am coveting
her baby and Scarlett has been so good to me. Forgive me, Lord. I
wouldn't really want Scarlett's baby but—but I would so like a baby of
my own!

She pushed a small cushion behind her aching back and thought
hungrily of a daughter of her own. But Dr. Meade had never changed his
opinion on that subject. And though she was quite willing to risk her
life for another child, Ashley would not hear of it. A daughter. How
Ashley would love a daughter!

A daughter! Mercy! She sat up in alarm. I never told Captain Butler
it was a girl! And of course he was expecting a boy. Oh, how
dreadful!

Melanie knew that to a woman a child of either sex was equally
welcome but to a man, and especially such a self-willed man as Captain
Butler, a girl would be a blow, a reflection upon his manhood. Oh, how
thankful she was that God had permitted her only child to be a boy! She
knew that, had she been the wife of the fearsome Captain Butler, she
would have thankfully died in childbirth rather than present him with a
daughter as his first- born.

But Mammy, waddling grinning from the room, set her mind at ease—
and at the same time made her wonder just what kind of man Captain
Butler really was.

"W'en Ah wuz bathin' dat chile jes' now," said Mammy, "Ah kinder
'pologized ter Mist' Rhett 'bout it not bein' a boy. But, Lawd, Miss
Melly, you know whut he say? He say, 'Hesh yo' mouf, Mammy! Who want a
boy? Boys ain' no fun. Dey's jes' a passel of trouble. Gals is whut is
fun. Ah wouldn' swap disyere gal fer a baker's dozen of boys.' Den he
try ter snatch de chile frum me, buck nekked as she wuz an' Ah slap his
wrist an' say 'B'have yo'seff, Mist' Rhett! Ah'll jes' bide mah time
tell you gits a boy, an' den Ah'll laff out loud to hear you holler fer
joy.' He grin an' shake his haid an' say, 'Mammy, you is a fool. Boys
ain' no use ter nobody. Ain' Ah a proof of dat?' Yas'm, Miss Melly, he
ack lak a gempmum 'bout it," finished Mammy graciously. It was not lost
on Melanie that Rhett's conduct had gone far toward redeeming him in
Mammy's eyes. "Maybe Ah done been a mite wrong 'bout Mist' Rhett. Dis
sho is a happy day ter me, Miss Melly. Ah done diapered three
ginrations of Robillard gals, an' it sho is a happy day."

"Oh, yes, it is a happy day, Mammy. The happiest days are the days
when babies come!"

To one person in the house it was not a happy day. Scolded and for
the most part ignored, Wade Hampton idled miserably about the dining
room. Early that morning, Mammy had waked him abruptly, dressed him
hurriedly and sent him with Ella to Aunt Pitty's house for breakfast.
The only explanation he received was that his mother was sick and the
noise of his playing might upset her. Aunt Pitty's house was in an
uproar, for the news of Scarlett's sickness had sent the old lady to
bed in a state with Cookie in attendance, and breakfast was a scant
meal that Peter concocted for the children. As the morning wore on fear
began to possess Wade's soul. Suppose Mother died? Other boys' mothers
had died. He had seen the hearses move away from the house and heard
his small friends sobbing. Suppose Mother should die? Wade loved his
mother very much, almost as much as he feared her, and the thought of
her being carried away in a black hearse behind black horses with
plumes on their bridles made his small chest ache so that he could
hardly breathe.

When noon came and Peter was busy in the kitchen, Wade slipped out
the front door and hurried home as fast as his short legs could carry
him, fear speeding him. Uncle Rhett or Aunt Melly or Mammy surely would
tell him the truth. But Uncle Rhett and Aunt Melly were not to be seen
and Mammy and Dilcey sped up and down the back stairs with towels and
basins of hot water and did not once notice him in the front hall. From
upstairs he could hear occasionally the curt tones of Dr. Meade
whenever a door opened. Once he heard his mother groan and he burst
into sobbing hiccoughs. He knew she was going to die. For comfort, he
made overtures to the honey- colored cat which lay on the sunny window
sill in the front hall. But Tom, full of yea

=== SCENE 101 ===
to worry more about troublesome people than
those who aren't."

"Mammy just said boys were troublesome."

"Well, Mammy was upset. She didn't mean it."

"Uncle Rhett, wouldn't you rather have had a little boy than a
little girl?" questioned Wade hopefully.

"No," answered Rhett swiftly and, seeing the boy's face fall, he
continued: "Now, why should I want a boy when I've already got
one?"

"You have?" cried Wade, his mouth falling open at this information.
"Where is he?"

"Right here," answered Rhett and, picking the child up, drew him to
his knee. "You are boy enough for me, son."

For a moment, the security and happiness of being wanted was so
great that Wade almost cried again. His throat worked and he ducked his
head against Rhett's waistcoat.

"You are my boy, aren't you?"

"Can you be—well, two men's boy?" questioned Wade, loyalty to the
father he had never known struggling with love for the man who held him
so understandingly.

"Yes," said Rhett firmly. "Just like you can be your mother's boy
and Aunt Melly's, too."

Wade digested this statement. It made sense to him and he smiled and
wriggled against Rhett's arm shyly.

"You understand little boys, don't you, Uncle Rhett?"

Rhett's dark face fell into its old harsh lines and his lip
twisted.

"Yes," he said bitterly, "I understand little boys."

For a moment, fear came back to Wade, fear and a sudden sense of
jealousy. Uncle Rhett was not thinking of him but of some one else.

"You haven't got any other little boys have you?"

Rhett set him on his feet.

"I'm going to have a drink and so are you, Wade, your first drink, a
toast to your new sister."

"You haven't got any other—" began Wade and then seeing Rhett reach
for the decanter of claret, the excitement at being included in this
grown-up ceremony diverted him.

"Oh, I can't, Uncle Rhett! I promised Aunt Melly I wouldn't drink
till I graduated from the university and she's going to give me a
watch, if I don't."

"And I'll give you a chain for it—this one I'm wearing now, if you
want it," said Rhett and he was smiling again. "Aunt Melly's quite
right. But she was talking about spirits, not wine. You must learn to
drink wine like a gentleman, son, and there's no time like the present
to learn."

Skillfully, he diluted the claret with water from the carafe until
the liquid was barely pink and handed the glass to Wade. At that
moment, Mammy entered the dining room. She had changed to her best
Sunday black and her apron and head rag were fresh and crisp. As she
waddled, she switched herself and from her skirts came the whisper and
rustle of silk. The worried look had gone from her face and her almost
toothless gums showed in a wide smile.

"Burfday gif', Mist' Rhett!" she said.

Wade stopped with his glass at his lips. He knew Mammy had never
liked his stepfather. He had never heard her call him anything except
"Cap'n Butler," and her conduct toward him had been dignified but cold.
And here she was beaming and sidling and calling him "Mist' Rhett!"
What a topsy-turvy day!

"You'd rather have rum than claret, I suppose," said Rhett, reaching
into the cellaret and producing a squat bottle. "She is a beautiful
baby, isn't she, Mammy?"

"She sho is," answered Mammy, smacking her lips as she took the
glass.

"Did you ever see a prettier one?"

"Well, suh, Miss Scarlett wuz mout nigh as pretty w'en she come but
not quite."

"Have another glass, Mammy. And Mammy," his tone was stern but his
eyes twinkled, "what's that rustling noise I hear?"

"Lawd, Mist' Rhett, dat ain' nuthin' but mah red silk petticoat!"
Mammy giggled and switched till her huge bulk shook.

"Nothing but your petticoat! I don't believe it. You sound like a
peck of dried leaves rubbing together. Let me see. Pull up your
skirt."

"Mist' Rhett, you is bad! Yeah-O, Lawd!"

Mammy gave a little shriek and retreated and from a distance of a
yard, modestly elevated her dress a few inches and showed the ruffle of
a red taffeta petticoat.

"You took long enough about wearing it," grumbled Rhett but his
black eyes laughed and danced.

"Yassuh, too long."

Then Rhett said something that Wade did not understand.

"No more mule in horse harness?"

"Mist' Rhett, Miss Scarlett wuz bad ter tell you dat! You ain'
holin' dat again' dis ole nigger?"

"No. I'm not holding it. I just wanted to know. Have another drink,
Mammy. Have the whole bottle. Drink up, Wade! Give us a toast."

"To Sissy," cried Wade and gulped the liquid down. Choking he began
to cough and hiccough and the other two laughed and beat him on the
back.


From the moment his daughter was born, Rhett's conduct was puzzling
to all observers and he upset many settled notions about himself,
notions which both the town and Scarlett were loath to surrender.
Whoever would have thought that he of all people would be so
shamelessly, so openly proud of fatherhood? Especially in view of the
embarrassing circumstance that his first-born was a girl and not a
boy.

The novelty of fatherhood did not wear off. This caused some secret
envy among women whose husbands took offspring for granted, long before
the children were christened. He buttonholed people on the street and
related details of his child's miraculous progress without even
prefacing his remarks with the hypocritical but polite: "I know
everyone thinks their own child is smart but—" He thought his daughter
marvelous, not to be compared with lesser brats, and he did not care
who knew it. When the new nurse permitted the baby to suck a bit of fat
pork, thereby bringing on the first attack of colic, Rhett's conduct
sent seasoned fathers and mothers into gales of laughter. He hurriedly
summoned Dr. Meade and two other doctors, and with difficulty he was
restrained from beating the unfortunate nurse with his crop. The nurse
was discharged and thereafter followed a series of nurses who remained,
at the most, a week. None of them was good enough to satisfy the
exacting requirements Rhett laid down.

Mammy likewise viewed with displeasure the nurses that came and
went, for she was jealous of any strange negro and saw no reason why
she could not care for the baby and Wade and Ella, too. But Mammy was
showing her age and rheumatism was slowing her lumbering tread. Rhett
lacked the courage to cite these reasons for employing another nurse.
He told her instead that a man of his position could not afford to have
only one nurse. It did not look well. He would hire two others to do
the drudgery and leave her as Mammy-in-chief. This Mammy understood
very well. More servants were a credit to her position as well as
Rhett's. But she would not, she told him firmly, have any trashy free
issue niggers in her nursery. So Rhett sent to Tara for Prissy. He knew
her shortcomings but, after all, she was a family darky. And Uncle
Peter produced a great-niece named Lou who had belonged to one of Miss
Pitty's Burr cousins.

Even before Scarlett was able to be about again, she noticed Rhett's
pre-occupation with the baby and was somewhat nettled and embarrassed
at his pride in her in front of callers. It was all very well for a man
to love his child but she felt there was something unmanly in the
display of such love. He should be offhand and careless, as other men
were.

"You are making a fool of yourself," she said irritably, "and I
don't see why."

"No? Well, you wouldn't. The reason is that she's the first person
who's ever belonged utterly to me."

"She belongs to me, too!"

"No, you have two other children. She's mine."

"Great balls of fire!" said Scarlett. "I had the baby, didn't I?
Besides, honey, I belong to you."

Rhett looked at her over the black head of the child and smiled
oddly.

"Do you, my dear?"

Only the entrance of Melanie stopped one of those swift hot quarrels
which seemed to spring up so easily between them these days. Scarlett
swallowed her wrath and watched Melanie take the baby. The name agreed
upon for the child was Eugenie Victoria, but that afternoon Melanie
unwittingly bestowed a name that clung, even as "Pittypat" had blotted
out all memory of Sarah Jane.

Rhett leaning over the child had said: "Her eyes are going to be pea
green."

"Indeed they are not," cried Melanie indignantly, forgetting that
Scarlett's eyes were almost that shade. "They are going to be blue,
like Mr. O'Hara's eyes, as blue as—as blue as the bonnie blue
flag."

"Bonnie Blue Butler," laughed Rhett, taking the child from her and
peering more closely into the small eyes. And Bonnie she became until
even her parents did not recall that she had been named for two
queens.

CHAPTER LI

When she was finally able to go out again, Scarlett had Lou lace her
into stays as tightly as the strings would pull. Then she passed the
tape measure about her waist. Twenty inches! She groaned aloud. That
was what having babies did to your figure! Her waist was a large as
Aunt Pitty's, as large as Mammy's.

"Pull them tighter, Lou. See if you can't make it eighteen and a
half inches or I can't get into any of my dresses."

"It'll bust de strings," said Lou. "Yo' wais' jes' done got bigger,
Miss Scarlett, an' dar ain' nuthin' ter do 'bout it."

"There is something to do about it," thought Scarlett as she ripped
savagely at the seams of her dress to let out the necessary inches. "I
just won't have any more babies."

Of course, Bonnie was pretty and a credit to her and Rhett adored
the child, but she would not have another baby. Just how she would
manage this she did not know, for she couldn't handle Rhett as she had
Frank. Rhett wasn't afraid of her. It would probably be difficult with
Rhett acting so foolishly about Bonnie and probably wanting a son next
year, for all that he said he'd drown any boy she gave him. Well, she
wouldn't give him a boy or girl either. Three children were enough for
any woman to have.

When Lou had stitched up the ripped seams, pressed them smooth and
buttoned Scarlett into the dress, she called the carriage and Scarlett
set out for the lumber yard. Her spirits rose as she went and she
forgot about her waist line, for she was going to meet Ashley at the
yard to go over the books with him. And, if she was lucky, she might
see him alone. She hadn't seen him since long before Bonnie was born.
She hadn't wanted to see him at all when she was so obviously pregnant.
And she had missed the daily contact with him, even if there was always
someone around. She had missed the importance and activity of her
lumber business while she was immured. Of course, she did not have to
work now. She could easily sell the mills and invest the money for Wade
and Ella. But that would mean she would hardly ever see Ashley, except
in a formal social way with crowds of people around. And working by
Ashley's side was her greatest pleasure.

When she drove up to the yard she saw with interest how high the
piles of lumber were and how many customers were standing among them,
talking to Hugh Elsing. And there were six mule teams and wagons being
loaded by the negro drivers. Six teams, she thought, with pride. And I
did all this by myself!

Ashley came to the door of the little office, his eyes joyful with
the pleasure of seeing her again and he handed her out of her carriage
and into the office as if she were a queen.

But some of her pleasure was dimmed when she went over the books of
his mill and compared them with Johnnie Gallegher's books. Ashley had
barely made expenses and Johnnie had a remarkable sum to his credit.
She forbore to say anything as she looked at the two sheets but Ashley
read her face.

"Scarlett, I'm sorry. All I can say is that I wish you'd let me hire
free darkies instead of using convicts. I believe I could do
better."

"Darkies! Why, their pay would break us. Convicts are dirt cheap. If
Johnnie can make this much with them—"

Ashley's eyes went over her shoulder, looking at something she could
not see, and the glad light went out of his eyes.

"I can't work convicts like Johnnie Gallegher. I can't drive
men."

"God's nightgown! Johnnie's a wonder at it. Ashley, you are just too
soft hearted. You ought to get more work out of them. Johnnie told me
that any time a malingerer wanted to get out of work he told you he was
sick and you gave him a day off. Good Lord, Ashley! That's no way to
make money. A couple of licks will cure most any sickness short of a
broken leg—"

"Scarlett! Scarlett! Stop! I can't bear to hear you talk that way,"
cried Ashley, his eyes coming back to her with a fierceness that
stopped her short. "Don't you realize that they are men—some of them
sick, underfed, miserable and— Oh, my dear, I can't bear to see the
way he has brutalized you, you who were always so sweet—"

"Who has whatted me?"

"I've got to say it and I haven't any right. But I've got to say it.
Your—Rhett Butler. Everything he touches he poisons. And he has taken
you who were so sweet and generous and gentle, for all your spirited
ways, and he has done this to you—hardened you, brutalized you by his
contact."

"Oh," breathed Scarlett, guilt struggling with joy that Ashley
should feel so deeply about her, should still think her sweet. Thank
God, he thought Rhett to blame for her penny-pinching ways. Of course,
Rhett had nothing to do with it and the guilt was hers but, after all,
another black mark on Rhett could do him no harm.

"If it were any other man in the world, I wouldn't care so much—
but Rhett Butler! I've seen what he's done to you. Without your
realizing it, he's twisted your thoughts into the same hard path his
own run in. Oh, yes, I know I shouldn't say this— He saved my life and
I am grateful but I wish to God it had been any other man but him! And
I haven't the right to talk to you like—"

"Oh, Ashley, you have the right—no one else has!"

"I tell you I can't bear it, seeing your fineness coarsened by him,
knowing that your beauty and your charm are in the keeping of a man
who— When I think of him touching you, I—"

"He's going to kiss me!" thought Scarlett ecstatically. "And it
won't be my fault!" She swayed toward him. But he drew back suddenly,
as if realizing he had said too much—said things he never intended to
say.

"I apologize most humbly, Scarlett. I—I've been insinuating that
your husband is not a gentleman and my own words have proved that I'm
not one. No one has a right to criticize a husband to a wife. I haven't
any excuse except—except—" He faltered and his face twisted. She
waited breathless.

"I haven't any excuse at all."

All the way home in the carriage Scarlett's mind raced. No excuse at
all except—except that he loved her! And the thought of her lying in
Rhett's arms roused a fury in him that she did not think possible.
Well, she could understand that. If it wasn't for the knowledge that
his relations with Melanie were, necessarily, those of brother and
sister, her own life would be a torment. And Rhett's embraces coarsened
her, brutalized her! Well, if Ashley thought that, she could do very
well without those embraces. She thought how sweet and romantic it
would be for them both to be physically true to each other, even though
married to other people. The idea possessed her imagination and she
took pleasure in it. And then, too, there was the practical side of it.
It would mean that she would not have to have any more children.

When she reached home and dismissed the carriage, some of the
exaltation which had filled her at Ashley's words began to fade as she
faced the prospect of telling Rhett that she wanted separate bedrooms
and all which that implied. It would be difficult. Moreover, how could
she tell Ashley that she had denied herself to Rhett, because of his
wishes? What earthly good was a sacrifice if no one knew about it? What
a burden modesty and delicacy were! If she could only talk to Ashley as
frankly as she could to Rhett! Well, no matter. She'd insinuate the
truth to Ashley somehow.

She went up the stairs and, opening the nursery door, found Rhett
sitting beside Bonnie's crib with Ella upon his lap and Wade displaying
the contents of his pocket to him. What a blessing Rhett liked children
and made much of them! Some stepfathers were so bitter about children
of former marriages.

"I want to talk to you," she said and passed on into their bedroom.
Better have this over now while her determination not to have any more
children was hot within her and while Ashley's love was giving her
strength.

"Rhett," she said abruptly when he had closed the bedroom door
behind him, "I've decided that I don't want any more children."

If he was startled at her unexpected statement he did not show it.
He lounged to a chair and sitting down, tilted it back.

"My pet, as I told you before Bonnie was born, it is immaterial to
me whether you have one child or twenty."

How perverse of him to evade the issue so neatly, as if not caring
whether children came had anything to do with their actual arrival.

"I think three are enough. I don't intend to have one every
year."

"Three seems an adequate number."

"You know very well—" she began, embarrassment making her cheeks
red. "You know what I mean?"

"I do. Do you realize that I can divorce you for refusing me my
marital rights?"

"You are just low enough to think of something like that," she
cried, annoyed that nothing was going as she planned it. "If you had
any chivalry you'd—you'd be nice like— Well, look at Ashley Wilkes.
Melanie can't have any children and he—"

"Quite the little gentleman, Ashley," said Rhett and his eyes began
to gleam oddly. "Pray go on with your discourse."

Scarlett choked, for her discourse was at its end and she had
nothing more to say. Now she saw how foolish had been her hope of
amicably settling so important a matter, especially with a selfish
swine like Rhett.

"You've been to the lumber office this afternoon, haven't you?"

"What has that to do with it?"

"You like dogs, don't you, Scarlett? Do you prefer them in kennels
or mangers?"

The allusion was lost on her as the tide of her anger and
disappointment rose.

He got lightly to his feet and coming to her put his hand under her
chin and jerked her face up to his.

"What a child you are! You have lived with three men and still know
nothing of men's natures. You seem to think they are like old ladies
past the change of life."

He pinched her chin playfully and his hand dropped away from her.
One black eyebrow went up as he bent a cool long look on her.

"Scarlett, understand this. If you and your bed still held any
charms for me, no looks and no entreaties could keep me away. And I
would have no sense of shame for anything I did, for I made a bargain
with you—a bargain which I have kept and you are now breaking. Keep
your chaste bed, my dear."

"Do you mean to tell me," cried Scarlett indignantly, "that you
don't care—"

"You have tired of me, haven't you? Well, men tire more easily than
women. Keep your sanctity, Scarlett. It will work no hardship on me. It
doesn't matter," he shrugged and grinned. "Fortunately the world is
full of beds—and most of the beds are full of women."

"You mean you'd actually be so—"

"My dear innocent! But, of course. It's a wonder I haven't strayed
long ere this. I never held fidelity to be a Virtue."

"I shall lock my door every night!"

"Why bother? If I wanted you, no lock would keep me out."

He turned, as though the subject were closed, and left the room.
Scarlett heard him going back to the nursery where he was welcomed by
the children. She sat down abruptly. She had had her way. This was what
she wanted and Ashley wanted. But it was not making her happy. Her
vanity was sore and she was mortified at the thought that Rhett had
taken it all so lightly, that he didn't want her, that he put her on
the level of other women in other beds.

She wished she could think of some delicate way to tell Ashley that
she and Rhett were no longer actually man and wife. But she knew now
she could not. It all seemed a terrible mess now and she half heartedly
wished she had said nothing about it. She would miss the long amusing
conversations in bed with Rhett when the ember of his cigar glowed in
the dark. She would miss the comfort of his arms when she woke
terrified from the dreams that she was running through cold mist.

Suddenly she felt very unhappy and leaning her head on the arm of
the chair, she cried.

CHAPTER LII

One rainy afternoon when Bonnie was barely past her first birthday,
Wade moped about the sitting room, occasionally going to the window and
flattening his nose on the dripping pane. He was a slender, weedy boy,
small for his eight years, quiet almost to shyness, never speaking
unless spoken to. He was bored and obviously at loss for entertainment,
for Ella was busy in the corner with her dolls, Scarlett was at her
secretary muttering to herself as she added a long column of figures,
and Rhett was lying on the floor, swinging his watch by its chain, just
out of Bonnie's reach.

After Wade had picked up several books and let them drop with bangs
and sighed deeply, Scarlett turned to him in irritation.

"Heavens, Wade! Run out and play."

"I can't. It's raining."

"Is it? I hadn't noticed. Well, do something. You make me nervous,
fidgeting about. Go tell Pork to hitch up the carriage and take you
over to play with Beau."

"He isn't home," sighed Wade. "He's at Raoul Picard's birthday
party."

Raoul was the small son of Maybelle and Rene Picard—a detestable
little brat, Scarlett thought, more like an ape than a child.

"Well, you can go to see anyone you want to. Run tell Pork."

"Nobody's at home," answered Wade. "Everybody's at the party."

The unspoken words "everybody—but me" hung in the air; but
Scarlett, her mind on her account books, paid no heed.

Rhett raised himself to a sitting posture and said: "Why aren't you
at the party too, son?"

Wade edged closer to him, scuffing one foot and looking unhappy.

"I wasn't invited, sir."

Rhett handed his watch into Bonnie's destructive grasp and rose
lightly to his feet.

"Leave those damned figures alone, Scarlett. Why wasn't Wade invited
to this party?"

"For Heaven's sake, Rhett! Don't bother me now. Ashley has gotten
these accounts in an awful snarl— Oh, that party? Well, I think it's
nothing unusual that Wade wasn't invited and I wouldn't let him go if
he had been. Don't forget that Raoul is Mrs. Merriwether's grandchild
and Mrs. Merriwether would as soon have a free issue nigger in her
sacred parlor as one of us."

Rhett, watching Wade's face with meditative eyes, saw the boy
flinch.

"Come here, son," he said, drawing the boy to him. "Would you like
to be at that party?"

"No, sir," said Wade bravely but his eyes fell.

"Hum. Tell me, Wade, do you go to little Joe Whiting's parties or
Frank Bonnell's or—well, any of your playmates?"

"No, sir. I don't get invited to many parties."

"Wade, you are lying!" cried Scarlett, turning. "You went to three
last week, the Bart children's party and the Gelerts' and the
Hundons'."

"As choice a collection of mules in horse harness as you could group
together," said Rhett, his voice going into a soft drawl. "Did you have
a good time at those parties? Speak up."

"No, sir."

"Why not?"

"I—I dunno, sir. Mammy—Mammy says they're white trash."

"I'll skin Mammy this minute!" cried Scarlett, leaping to her feet.
"And as for you, Wade, talking so about Mother's friends—"

"The boy's telling the truth and so is Mammy," said Rhett. "But, of
course, you've never been able to know the truth if you met it in the
road...Don't bother, son. You don't have to go to any more parties
you don't want to go to. Here," he pulled a bill from his pocket, "tell
Pork to harness the carriage and take you downtown. Buy yourself some
candy—a lot, enough to give you a wonderful stomach ache."

Wade, beaming, pocketed the bill and looked anxiously toward his
mother for confirmation. But she, with a pucker in her brows, was
watching Rhett. He had picked Bonnie from the floor and was cradling
her to him, her small face against his cheek. She could not read his
face but there was something in his eyes almost like fear—fear and
self-accusation.

Wade, encouraged by his stepfather's generosity, came shyly toward
him.

"Uncle Rhett, can I ask you sumpin'?"

"Of course." Rhett's look was anxious, absent, as he held Bonnie's
head closer. "What is it, Wade?"

"Uncle Rhett, were you—did you fight in the war?"

Rhett's eyes came alertly back and they were sharp, but his voice
was casual.

"Why do you ask, son?"

"Well, Joe Whiting said you didn't and so did Frankie Bonnell."

"Ah," said Rhett, "and what did you tell them?"

Wade looked unhappy.

"I—I said—I told them I didn't know." And with a rush, "But I
didn't care and I hit them. Were you in the war, Uncle Rhett?"

"Yes," said Rhett, suddenly violent. "I was in the war. I was in the
army for eight months. I fought all the way from Lovejoy up to
Franklin, Tennessee. And I was with Johnston when he surrendered."

Wade wriggled with pride but Scarlett laughed.

"I thought you were ashamed of your war record," she said. "Didn't
you tell me to keep it quiet?"

"Hush," he said briefly. "Does that satisfy you, Wade?"

"Oh, yes, sir! I knew you were in the war. I knew you weren't scared
like they said. But—why weren't you with the other little boys'
fathers?"

"Because the other little boys' fathers were such fools they had to
put them in the infantry. I was a West Pointer and so I was in the
artillery. In the regular artillery, Wade, not the Home Guard. It takes
a pile of sense to be in the artillery, Wade."

"I bet," said Wade, his face shining. "Did you get wounded, Uncle
Rhett?"

Rhett hesitated.

"Tell him about your dysentery," jeered Scarlett.

Rhett carefully set the baby on the floor and pulled his shirt and
undershirt out of his trouser band.

"Come here, Wade, and I'll show you where I was wounded."

Wade advanced, excited, and gazed where Rhett's finger pointed. A
long raised scar ran across his brown chest and down into his heavily
muscled abdomen. It was the souvenir of a knife fight in the California
gold fields but Wade did not know it. He breathed heavily and
happily.

"I guess you're 'bout as brave as my father, Uncle Rhett."

"Almost but not quite," said Rhett, stuffing his shirt into his
trousers. "Now, go on and spend your dollar and whale hell out of any
boy who says I wasn't in the army."

Wade went dancing out happily, calling to Pork, and Rhett picked up
the baby again.

"Now why all these lies, my gallant soldier laddie?" asked
Scarlett.

"A boy has to be proud of his father—or stepfather. I can't let him
be ashamed before the other little brutes. Cruel creatures,
children."

"Oh, fiddle-dee-dee!"

"I never thought about what it meant to Wade," said Rhett slowly. "I
never thought how he's suffered. And it's not going to be that way for
Bonnie."

"What way?"

"Do you think I'm going to have my Bonnie ashamed of her father?
Have her left out of parties when she's nine or ten? Do you think I'm
going to have her humiliated like Wade for things that aren't her fault
but yours and mine?"

"Oh, children's parties!"

"Out of children's parties grow young girls' debut parties. Do you
think I'm going to let my daughter grow up outside of everything decent
in Atlanta? I'm not going to send her North to school and to visit
because she won't be accepted here or in Charleston or Savannah or New
Orleans. And I'm not going to see her forced to marry a Yankee or a
foreigner because no decent Southern family will have her—because her
mother was a fool and her father a blackguard."

Wade, who had come back to the door, was an interested but puzzled
listener.

"Bonnie can marry Beau, Uncle Rhett."

The anger went from Rhett's face as he turned to the little boy, and
he considered his words with apparent seriousness as he always did when
dealing with the children.

"That's true, Wade. Bonnie can marry Beau Wilkes, but who will you
marry?"

"Oh, I shan't marry anyone," said Wade confidently, luxuriating in a
man-to-man talk with the one person, except Aunt Melly, who never
reproved and always encouraged him. "I'm going to go to Harvard and be
a lawyer, like my father, and then I'm going to be a brave soldier just
like him."

"I wish Melly would keep her mouth shut," cried Scarlett. "Wade, you
are not going to Harvard. It's a Yankee school and I won't have you
going to a Yankee school. You are going to the University of Georgia
and after you graduate you are going to manage the store for me. And as
for your father being a brave soldier—"

"Hush," said Rhett curtly, not missing the shining light in Wade's
eyes when he spoke of the father he had never known. "You grow up and
be a brave man like your father, Wade. Try to be just like him, for he
was a hero and don't let anyone tell you differently. He married your
mother, didn't he? Well, that's proof enough of heroism. And I'll see
that you go to Harvard and become a lawyer. Now, run along and tell
Pork to take you to town."

"I'll thank you to let me manage my children," cried Scarlett as
Wade obediently trotted from the room.

"You're a damned poor manager. You've wrecked whatever chances Ella
and Wade had, but I won't permit you to do Bonnie that way. Bonnie's
going to be a little princess and everyone in the world is going to
want her. There's not going to be any place she can't go. Good God, do
you think I'm going to let her grow up and associate with the riffraff
that fills this house?"

"They are good enough for you—"

"And a damned sight too good for you, my pet. But not for Bonnie. Do
you think I'd let her marry any of this runagate gang you spend your
time with? Irishmen on the make, Yankees, white trash, Carpetbag
parvenus— My Bonnie with her Butler blood and her Robillard
strain—"

"The O'Haras—"

"The O'Haras might have been kings of Ireland once but your father
was nothing but a smart Mick on the make. And you are no better— But
then, I'm at fault too. I've gone through life like a bat out of hell,
never caring what I did, because nothing ever mattered to me. But
Bonnie matters. God, what a fool I've been! Bonnie wouldn't be received
in Charleston, no matter what my mother or your Aunt Eulalie or Aunt
Pauline did—and it's obvious that she won't be received here unless we
do something quickly—"

"Oh, Rhett, you take it so seriously you're funny. With our
money—"

"Damn our money! All our money can't buy what I want for her. I'd
rather Bonnie was invited to eat dry bread in the Picards' miserable
house or Mrs. Elsing's rickety barn than to be the belle of a
Republican inaugural ball. Scarlett, you've been a fool. You should
have insured a place for your children in the social scheme years
ago—but you didn't. You didn't even bother to keep what position you
had. And it's too much to hope that you'll mend your ways at this late
date. You're too anxious to make money and too fond of bullying
people."

"I consider this whole affair a tempest in a teapot," said Scarlett
coldly, rattling her papers to indicate that as far as she was
concerned the discussion was finished.

"We have only Mrs. Wilkes to help us and you do your best to
alienate and insult her. Oh, spare me your remarks about her poverty
and her tacky clothes. She's the soul and the center of everything in
Atlanta that's sterling. Thank God for her. She'll help me do something
about it."

"And what are you going to do?"

"Do? I'm going to cultivate every female dragon of the Old Guard in
this town, especially Mrs. Merriwether, Mrs. Elsing, Mrs. Whiting and
Mrs. Meade. If I have to crawl on my belly to every fat old cat who
hates me, I'll do it. I'll be meek under their coldness and repentant
of my evil ways. I'll contribute to their damned charities and I'll go
to their damned churches. I'll admit and brag about my services to the
Confederacy and, if worst comes to worst, I'll join their damned
Klan—though a merciful God could hardly lay so heavy a penance on my
shoulders as that. And I shall not hesitate to remind the fools whose
necks I saved that they owe me a debt. And you, Madam, will kindly
refrain from undoing my work behind my back and foreclosing mortgages
on any of the people I'm courting or selling them rotten lumber or in
other ways insulting them. And Governor Bullock never sets foot in this
house again. Do you hear? And none of this gang of elegant thieves
you've been associating with, either. If you do invite them, over my
request, you will find yourself in the embarrassing position of having
no host in your home. If they come in this house, I will spend the time
in Belle Watling's bar telling anyone who cares to hear that I won't
stay under the same roof with them."

Scarlett, who had been smarting under his words, laughed
shortly.

"So the river-boat gambler and the speculator is going to be
respectable! Well, your first move toward respectability had better be
the sale of Belle Watling's house."

That was a shot in the dark. She had never been absolutely certain
that Rhett owned the house. He laughed suddenly, as though he read her
mind.

"Thanks for the suggestion."


Had he tried, Rhett could not have chosen a more difficult time to
beat his way back to respectability. Never before or after did the
names Republican and Scallawag carry such odium, for now the corruption
of the Carpetbag regime was at its height. And, since the surrender,
Rhett's name had been inextricably linked with Yankees, Republicans and
Scallawags.

Atlanta people had thought, with helpless fury, in 1866, that
nothing could be worse than the harsh military rule they had then, but
now, under Bullock, they were learning the worst. Thanks to the negro
vote, the Republicans and their allies were firmly entrenched and they
were riding rough-shod over the powerless but still protesting
minority.

Word had been spread among the negroes that there were only two
pol

=== SCENE 102 ===
laid upon it.

It was a glorious spree for the gang which had Georgia by the
throat. There was an orgy of grabbing and over all there was a cold
cynicism about open theft in high places that was chilling to
contemplate. Protests and efforts to resist accomplished nothing, for
the state government was being upheld and supported by the power of the
United States Army.

Atlanta cursed the name of Bullock and his Scallawags and
Republicans and they cursed the name of anyone connected with them. And
Rhett was connected with them. He had been in with them, so everyone
said, in all their schemes. But now, he turned against the stream in
which he had drifted so short a while before, and began swimming
arduously back against the current.

He went about his campaign slowly, subtly, not arousing the
suspicions of Atlanta by the spectacle of a leopard trying to change
his spots overnight. He avoided his dubious cronies and was seen no
more in the company of Yankee officers, Scallawags and Republicans. He
attended Democratic rallies and he ostentatiously voted the Democratic
ticket. He gave up high-stake card games and stayed comparatively
sober. If he went to Belle Watling's house at all, he went by night and
by stealth as did more respectable townsmen, instead of leaving his
horse hitched in front of her door in the afternoons as an
advertisement of his presence within.

And the congregation of the Episcopal Church almost fell out of
their pews when he tiptoed in, late for services, with Wade's hand held
in his. The congregation was as much stunned by Wade's appearance as by
Rhett's, for the little boy was supposed to be a Catholic. At least,
Scarlett was one. Or she was supposed to be one. But she had not put
foot in the church in years, for religion had gone from her as many of
Ellen's other teachings had gone. Everyone thought she had neglected
her boy's religious education and thought more of Rhett for trying to
rectify the matter, even if he did take the boy to the Episcopal Church
instead of the Catholic.

Rhett could be grave of manner and charming when he chose to
restrain his tongue and keep his black eyes from dancing maliciously.
It had been years since he had chosen to do this but he did it now,
putting on gravity and charm, even as he put on waistcoats of more
sober hues. It was not difficult to gain a foothold of friendliness
with the men who owed their necks to him. They would have showed their
appreciation long ago, had Rhett not acted as if their appreciation
were a matter of small moment. Now, Hugh Elsing, Rene, the Simmons
boys, Andy Bonnell and the others found him pleasant, diffident about
putting himself forward and embarrassed when they spoke of the
obligation they owed him.

"It was nothing," he would protest. "In my place you'd have all done
the same thing."

He subscribed handsomely to the fund for the repairs of the
Episcopal Church and he gave a large, but not vulgarly large,
contribution to the Association for the Beautification of the Graves of
Our Glorious Dead. He sought out Mrs. Elsing to make this donation and
embarrassedly begged that she keep his gift a secret, knowing very well
that this would spur her to spreading the news. Mrs. Elsing hated to
take his money—"speculator money"—but the Association needed money
badly.

"I don't see why you of all people should be subscribing," she said
acidly.

When Rhett told her with the proper sober mien that he was moved to
contribute by the memories of former comrades in arms, braver than he
but less fortunate, who now lay in unmarked graves, Mrs. Elsing's
aristocratic jaw dropped. Dolly Merriwether had told her Scarlett had
said Captain Butler was in the army but, of course, she hadn't believed
it. Nobody had believed it.

"You in the army? What was your company—your regiment?"

Rhett gave them.

"Oh, the artillery! Everyone I knew was either in the cavalry or the
infantry. Then, that explains—" She broke off, disconcerted, expecting
to see his eyes snap with malice. But he only looked down and toyed
with his watch chain.

"I would have liked the infantry," he said, passing completely over
her insinuation, "but when they found that I was a West Pointer—
though I did not graduate, Mrs. Elsing, due to a boyish prank—they put
me in the artillery, the regular artillery, not the militia. They
needed men with specialized knowledge in that last campaign. You know
how heavy the losses had been, so many artillerymen killed. It was
pretty lonely in the artillery. I didn't see a soul I knew. I don't
believe I saw a single man from Atlanta during my whole service."

"Well!" said Mrs. Elsing, confused. If he had been in the army then
she was wrong. She had made many sharp remarks about his cowardice and
the memory of them made her feel guilty. "Well! And why haven't you
ever told anybody about your service? You act as though you were
ashamed of it."

Rhett looked her squarely in the eyes, his face blank.

"Mrs. Elsing," he said earnestly, "believe me when I say that I am
prouder of my services to the Confederacy than of anything I have ever
done or will do. I feel—I feel—"

"Well, why did you keep it hidden?"

"I was ashamed to speak of it, in the light of—of some of my former
actions."

Mrs. Elsing reported the contribution and the conversation in detail
to Mrs. Merriwether.

"And, Dolly, I give you my word that when he said that about being
ashamed, tears came into his eyes! Yes, tears! I nearly cried
myself."

"Stuff and nonsense!" cried Mrs. Merriwether in disbelief. "I don't
believe tears came into his eyes any more than I believe he was in the
army. And I can find out mighty quick. If he was in that artillery
outfit, I can get at the truth, for Colonel Carleton who commanded it
married the daughter of one of my grandfather's sisters and I'll write
him."

She wrote Colonel Carlton and to her consternation received a reply
praising Rhett's services in no uncertain terms. A born artilleryman, a
brave soldier and an uncomplaining gentleman, a modest man who wouldn't
even take a commission when it was offered him.

"Well!" said Mrs. Merriwether showing the letter to Mrs. Elsing.
"You can knock me down with a feather! Maybe we did misjudge the scamp
about not being a soldier. Maybe we should have believed what Scarlett
and Melanie said about him enlisting the day the town fell. But, just
the same, he's a Scallawag and a rascal and I don't like him!"

"Somehow," said Mrs. Elsing uncertainly, "somehow, I don't think
he's so bad. A man who fought for the Confederacy can't be all bad.
It's Scarlett who is the bad one. Do you know, Dolly, I really believe
that he—well, he's ashamed of Scarlett but is too much of a gentleman
to let on."

"Ashamed! Pooh! They're both cut out of the same piece of cloth.
Where did you ever get such a silly notion?"

"It isn't silly," said Mrs. Elsing indignantly. "Yesterday, in the
pouring rain, he had those three children, even the baby, mind you, out
in his carriage riding them up and down Peachtree Street and he gave me
a lift home. And when I said: 'Captain Butler, have you lost your mind
keeping these children out in the damp? Why don't you take them home?'
And he didn't say a word but just looked embarrassed. But Mammy spoke
up and said: 'De house full of w'ite trash an' it healthier fer de
chillun in de rain dan at home!'"

"What did he say?"

"What could he say? He just scowled at Mammy and passed it over. You
know Scarlett was giving a big whist party yesterday afternoon with all
those common ordinary women there. I guess he didn't want them kissing
his baby."

"Well!" said Mrs. Merriwether, wavering but still obstinate. But the
next week she, too, capitulated.

Rhett now had a desk in the bank. What he did at this desk the
bewildered officials of the bank did not know, but he owned too large a
block of the stock for them to protest his presence there. After a
while they forgot that they had objected to him for he was quiet and
well mannered and actually knew something about banking and
investments. At any rate he sat at his desk all day, giving every
appearance of industry, for he wished to be on equal terms with his
respectable fellow townsmen who worked and worked hard.

Mrs. Merriwether, wishing to expand her growing bakery, had tried to
borrow two thousand dollars from the bank with her house as security.
She had been refused because there were already two mortgages on the
house. The stout old lady was storming out of the bank when Rhett
stopped her, learned the trouble and said, worriedly: "But there must
be some mistake, Mrs. Merriwether. Some dreadful mistake. You of all
people shouldn't have to bother about collateral. Why, I'd lend you
money just on your word! Any lady who could build up the business
you've built up is the best risk in the world. The bank wants to lend
money to people like you. Now, do sit down right here in my chair and I
will attend to it for you."

When he came back he was smiling blandly, saying that there had been
a mistake, just as he had thought. The two thousand dollars was right
there waiting for her whenever she cared to draw against it. Now, about
her house—would she just sign right here?

Mrs. Merriwether, torn with indignation and insult, furious that she
had to take this favor from a man she disliked and distrusted, was
hardly gracious in her thanks.

But he failed to notice it. As he escorted her to the door, he said:
"Mrs. Merriwether, I have always had a great regard for your knowledge
and I wonder if you could tell me something?"

The plumes on her bonnet barely moved as she nodded.

"What did you do when your Maybelle was little and she sucked her
thumb?"

"What?"

"My Bonnie sucks her thumb. I can't make her stop it."

"You should make her stop it," said Mrs. Merriwether vigorously. "It
will ruin the shape of her mouth."

"I know! I know! And she has a beautiful mouth. But I don't know
what to do."

"Well, Scarlett ought to know," said Mrs. Merriwether shortly.
"She's had two other children."

Rhett looked down at his shoes and sighed.

"I've tried putting soap under her finger nails," he said, passing
over her remark about Scarlett.

"Soap! Bah! Soap is no good at all. I put quinine on Maybelle's
thumb and let me tell you, Captain Butler, she stopped sucking that
thumb mighty quick."

"Quinine! I would never have thought of it! I can't thank you
enough, Mrs. Merriwether. It was worrying me."

He gave her a smile, so pleasant, so grateful that Mrs. Merriwether
stood uncertainly for a moment. But as she told him good-by she was
smiling too. She hated to admit to Mrs. Elsing that she had misjudged
the man but she was an honest person and she said there had to be
something good about a man who loved his child. What a pity Scarlett
took no interest in so pretty a creature as Bonnie! There was something
pathetic about a man trying to raise a little girl all by himself!
Rhett knew very well the pathos of the spectacle, and if it blackened
Scarlett's reputation he did not care.

From the time the child could walk he took her about with him
constantly, in the carriage or in front of his saddle. When he came
home from the bank in the afternoon, he took her walking down Peachtree
Street, holding her hand, slowing his long strides to her toddling
steps, patiently answering her thousand questions. People were always
in their front yards or on their porches at sunset and, as Bonnie was
such a friendly, pretty child, with her tangle of black curls and her
bright blue eyes, few could resist talking to her. Rhett never presumed
on these conversations but stood by, exuding fatherly pride and
gratification at the notice taken of his daughter.

Atlanta had a long memory and was suspicious and slow to change.
Times were hard and feeling was bitter against anyone who had had
anything to do with Bullock and his crowd. But Bonnie had the combined
charm of Scarlett and Rhett at their best and she was the small opening
wedge Rhett drove into the wall of Atlanta's coldness.


Bonnie grew rapidly and every day it became more evident that Gerald
O'Hara had been her grandfather. She had short sturdy legs and wide
eyes of Irish blue and a small square jaw that went with a
determination to have her own way. She had Gerald's sudden temper to
which she gave vent in screaming tantrums that were forgotten as soon
as her wishes were gratified. And as long as her father was near her,
they were always gratified hastily. He spoiled her despite all the
efforts of Mammy and Scarlett, for in all things she pleased him,
except one. And that was her fear of the dark.

Until she was two years old she went to sleep readily in the nursery
she shared with Wade and Ella. Then, for no apparent reason, she began
to sob whenever Mammy waddled out of the room, carrying the lamp. From
this she progressed to wakening in the late night hours, screaming with
terror, frightening the other two children and alarming the house. Once
Dr. Meade had to be called and Rhett was short with him when he
diagnosed only bad dreams. All anyone could get from her was one word,
"Dark."

Scarlett was inclined to be irritated with the child and favored a
spanking. She would not humor her by leaving a lamp burning in the
nursery, for then Wade and Ella would be unable to sleep. Rhett,
worried but gentle, attempting to extract further information from his
daughter, said coldly that if any spanking were done, he would do it
personally and to Scarlett.

The upshot of the situation was that Bonnie was removed from the
nursery to the room Rhett now occupied alone. Her small bed was placed
beside his large one and a shaded lamp burned on the table all night
long. The town buzzed when this story got about. Somehow, there was
something indelicate about a girl child sleeping in her father's room,
even though the girl was only two years old. Scarlett suffered from
this gossip in two ways. First, it proved indubitably that she and her
husband occupied separate rooms, in itself a shocking enough state of
affairs. Second, everyone thought that if the child was afraid to sleep
alone, her place was with her mother. And Scarlett did not feel equal
to explaining that she could not sleep in a lighted room nor would
Rhett permit the child to sleep with her.

"You'd never wake up unless she screamed and then you'd probably
slap her," he said shortly.

Scarlett was annoyed at the weight he attached to Bonnie's night
terrors but she thought she could eventually remedy the state of
affairs and transfer the child back to the nursery. All children were
afraid of the dark and the only cure was firmness. Rhett was just being
perverse in the matter, making her appear a poor mother, just to pay
her back for banishing him from her room.

He had never put foot in her room or even rattled the door knob
since the night she told him she did not want any more children.
Thereafter and until he began staying at home on account of Bonnie's
fears, he had been absent from the supper table more often than he had
been present. Sometimes he had stayed out all night and Scarlett, lying
awake behind her locked door, hearing the clock count off the early
morning hours, wondered where he was. She remembered: "There are other
beds, my dear!" Though the thought made her writhe, there was nothing
she could do about it. There was nothing she could say that would not
precipitate a scene in which he would be sure to remark upon her locked
door and the probable connection Ashley had with it. Yes, his
foolishness about Bonnie sleeping in a lighted room—in his lighted
room—was just a mean way of paying her back.

She did not realize the importance he attached to Bonnie's
foolishness nor the completeness of his devotion to the child until one
dreadful night. The family never forgot that night.

That day Rhett had met an ex-blockade runner and they had had much
to say to each other. Where they had gone to talk and drink, Scarlett
did not know but she suspected, of course, Belle Watling's house. He
did not come home in the afternoon to take Bonnie walking nor did he
come home to supper. Bonnie, who had watched from the window
impatiently all afternoon, anxious to display a mangled collection of
beetles and roaches to her father, had finally been put to bed by Lou,
amid wails and protests.

Either Lou had forgotten to light the lamp or it had burned out. No
one ever knew exactly what happened but when Rhett finally came home,
somewhat the worse for drink, the house was in an uproar and Bonnie's
screams reached him even in the stables. She had waked in darkness and
called for him and he had not been there. All the nameless horrors that
peopled her small imagination clutched her. All the soothing and bright
lights brought by Scarlett and the servants could not quiet her and
Rhett, coming up the stairs three at a jump, looked like a man who has
seen Death.

When he finally had her in his arms and from her sobbing gasps had
recognized only one word, "Dark," he turned on Scarlett and the negroes
in fury.

"Who put out the light? Who left her alone in the dark? Prissy, I'll
skin you for this, you—"

"Gawdlmighty, Mist' Rhett! 'Twarn't me! 'Twuz Lou!"

"Fo' Gawd, Mist' Rhett, Ah—"

"Shut up. You know my orders. By God, I'll—get out. Don't come
back. Scarlett, give her some money and see that she's gone before I
come down stairs. Now, everybody get out, everybody!"

The negroes fled, the luckless Lou wailing into her apron. But
Scarlett remained. It was hard to see her favorite child quieting in
Rhett's arms when she had screamed so pitifully in her own. It was hard
to see the small arms going around his neck and hear the choking voice
relate what had frightened her, when she, Scarlett, had gotten nothing
coherent out of her.

"So it sat on your chest," said Rhett softly. "Was it a big
one?"

"Oh, yes! Dretfull big. And claws."

"Ah, claws, too. Well, now. I shall certainly sit up all night and
shoot him if he comes back." Rhett's voice was interested and soothing
and Bonnie's sobs died away. Her voice became less choked as she went
into detailed description of her monster guest in a language which only
he could understand. Irritation stirred in Scarlett as Rhett discussed
the matter as if it had been something real.

"For Heaven's sake, Rhett—"

But he made a sign for silence. When Bonnie was at last asleep, he
laid her in her bed and pulled up the sheet.

"I'm going to skin that nigger alive," he said quietly. "It's your
fault too. Why didn't you come up here to see if the light was
burning?"

"Don't be a fool, Rhett," she whispered. "She gets this way because
you humor her. Lots of children are afraid of the dark but they get
over it. Wade was afraid but I didn't pamper him. If you'd just let her
scream for a night or two—"

"Let her scream!" For a moment Scarlett thought he would hit her.
"Either you are a fool or the most inhuman woman I've ever seen."

"I don't want her to grow up nervous and cowardly."

"Cowardly? Hell's afire! There isn't a cowardly bone in her body!
But you haven't any imagination and, of course, you can't appreciate
the tortures of people who have one—especially a child. If something
with claws and horns came and sat on your chest, you'd tell it to get
the hell off you, wouldn't you? Like hell you would. Kindly remember,
Madam, that I've seen you wake up squalling like a scalded cat simply
because you dreamed of running in a fog. And that's not been so long
ago either!"

Scarlett was taken aback, for she never liked to think of that
dream. Moreover, it embarrassed her to remember that Rhett had
comforted her in much the same manner he comforted Bonnie. So she swung
rapidly to a different attack.

"You are just humoring her and—"

"And I intend to keep on humoring her. If I do, she'll outgrow it
and forget about it."

"Then," said Scarlett acidly, "if you intend to play nursemaid, you
might try coming home nights and sober too, for a change."

"I shall come home early but drunk as a fiddler's bitch if I
please."

He did come home early thereafter, arriving long before time for

=== SCENE 103 ===
"There's more ways of killing a cat than choking him to death with
butter," giggled Melanie when the whiskered old man had thumped down
the stairs. "I had intended all along for Archie to put up those
lanterns but you know how he is. He won't do a thing if you ask him to.
And now we've got him out from underfoot for a while. The darkies are
so scared of him they just won't do any work when he's around,
breathing down their necks."

"Melly, I wouldn't have that old desperado in my house," said
Scarlett crossly. She hated Archie as much as he hated her and they
barely spoke. Melanie's was the only house in which he would remain if
she were present. And even in Melanie's house, he stared at her with
suspicion and cold contempt. "He'll cause you trouble, mark my
words."

"Oh, he's harmless if you flatter him and act like you depend on
him," said Melanie. "And he's so devoted to Ashley and Beau that I
always feel safe having him around."

"You mean he's so devoted to you, Melly," said India, her cold face
relaxing into a faintly warm smile as her gaze rested fondly on her
sister-in-law. "I believe you're the first person that old ruffian has
loved since his wife—er—since his wife. I think he'd really like for
somebody to insult you, so he could kill them to show his respect for
you."

"Mercy! How you run on, India!" said Melanie blushing. "He thinks
I'm a terrible goose and you know it."

"Well, I don't see that what that smelly old hill-billy thinks is of
any importance," said Scarlett abruptly. The very thought of how Archie
had sat in judgment upon her about the convicts always enraged her. "I
have to go now. I've got to go get dinner and then go by the store and
pay off the clerks and go by the lumber yard and pay the drivers and
Hugh Elsing."

"Oh, are you going to the lumber yard?" asked Melanie. "Ashley is
coming in to the yard in the late afternoon to see Hugh. Can you
possibly hold him there till five o'clock? If he comes home earlier
he'll be sure to catch us finishing up a cake or something and then he
won't be surprised at all."

Scarlett smiled inwardly, good temper restored.

"Yes, I'll hold him," she said.

As she spoke, India's pale lashless eyes met hers piercingly. She
always looks at me so oddly when I speak of Ashley, thought
Scarlett.

"Well, hold him there as long as you can after five o'clock," said
Melanie. "And then India will drive down and pick him up....
Scarlett, do come early tonight. I don't want you to miss a minute of
the reception."

As Scarlett rode home she thought sullenly: "She doesn't want me to
miss a minute of the reception, eh? Well then, why didn't she invite me
to receive with her and India and Aunt Pitty?"

Generally, Scarlett would not have cared whether she received at
Melly's piddling parties or not. But this was the largest party Melanie
had ever given and Ashley's birthday party too, and Scarlett longed to
stand by Ashley's side and receive with him. But she knew why she had
not been invited to receive. Even had she not known it, Rhett's comment
on the subject had been frank enough.

"A Scallawag receive when all the prominent ex-Confederates and
Democrats are going to be there? Your notions are as enchanting as they
are muddle headed. It's only because of Miss Melly's loyalty that you
are invited at all."

Scarlett dressed with more than usual care that afternoon for her
trip to the store and the lumber yard, wearing the new dull-green
changeable taffeta frock that looked lilac in some lights and the new
pale-green bonnet, circled about with dark-green plumes. If only Rhett
would let her cut bangs and frizzle them on her forehead, how much
better this bonnet would look! But he had declared that he would shave
her whole head if she banged her forelocks. And these days he acted so
atrociously he really might do it.

It was a lovely afternoon, sunny but not too hot, bright but not
glaring, and the warm breeze that rustled the trees along Peachtree
Street made the plumes on Scarlett's bonnet dance. Her heart danced
too, as always when she was going to see Ashley.

=== SCENE 104 ===
ing her hands and smiling, completely friendly,
without strain or fever. It seemed miraculous that this could be when
she thought of all the unsaid things that lay between them. His eyes
looked into hers, clear and shining, smiling in the old way she loved,
smiling as though there had never been anything between them but
happiness. There was no barrier between his eyes and hers now, no
baffling remoteness. She laughed.

"Oh, Ashley, I'm getting old and decrepit."

"Ah, that's very apparent! No, Scarlett, when you are sixty, you'll
look the same to me. I'll always remember you as you were that day of
our last barbecue, sitting under an oak with a dozen boys around you. I
can even tell you just how you were dressed, in a white dress covered
with tiny green flowers and a white lace shawl about your shoulders.
You had on little green slippers with black lacings and an enormous
leghorn hat with long green streamers. I know that dress by heart
because when I was in prison and things got too bad, I'd take out my
memories and thumb them over like pictures, recalling every little
detail—"

He stopped abruptly and the eager light faded from his face. He
dropped her hands gently and she sat waiting, waiting for his next
words.

"We've come a long way, both of us, since that day, haven't we,
Scarlett? We've traveled roads we never expected to travel. You've come
swiftly, directly, and I, slowly and reluctantly."

He sat down on the table again and looked at her and a small smile
crept back into his face. But it was not the smile that had made her so
happy so short a while before. It was a bleak smile.

"Yes, you came swiftly, dragging me at your chariot wheels.
Scarlett, sometimes I have an impersonal curiosity as to what would
have happened to me without you."

Scarlett went quickly to defend him from himself, more quickly
because treacherously there rose to her mind Rhett's words on this same
subject.

"But I've never done anything for you, Ashley. Without me, you'd
have been just the same. Some day, you'd have been a rich man, a great
man like you are going to be."

"No, Scarlett, the seeds of greatness were never in me. I think that
if it hadn't been for you, I'd have gone down into oblivion— like poor
Cathleen Calvert and so many other people who once had great names, old
names."

"Oh, Ashley, don't talk like that. You sound so sad."

"No, I'm not sad. Not any longer. Once—once I was sad. Now, I'm
only—"

He stopped and suddenly she knew what he was thinking. It was the
first time she had ever known what Ashley was thinking when his eyes
went past her, crystal clear, absent. When the fury of love had beaten
in her heart, his mind had been closed to her. Now, in the quiet
friendliness that lay between them, she could walk a little way into
his mind, understand a little. He was not sad any longer. He had been
sad after the surrender, sad when she begged him to come to Atlanta.
Now, he was only resigned.

"I hate to hear you talk like that, Ashley," she said vehemently.
"You sound just like Rhett. He's always harping on things like that and
something he calls the survival of the fitting till I'm so bored I
could scream."

Ashley smiled.

"Did you ever stop to think, Scarlett, that Rhett and I are
fundamentally alike?"

"Oh, no! You are so fine, so honorable and he—" She broke off,
confused.

"But we are. We came of the same kind of people, we were raised in
the same pattern, brought up to think the same things. And somewhere
along the road we took different turnings. We still think alike but we
react differently. As, for instance, neither of us believed in the war
but I enlisted and fought and he stayed out till nearly the end. We
both knew the war was all wrong. We both

=== SCENE 105 ===
instantly, swiftly, by Ashley's order, leaving Ashley and Archie in
grim converse in the little room and India and Mrs. Elsing outside with
their backs to her. Shame and fear sped her homeward and, in her mind,
Archie with his patriarch's beard assumed the proportions of an
avenging angel straight from the pages of the Old Testament.

The house was empty and still in the April sunset. All the servants
had gone to a funeral and the children were playing in Melanie's back
yard. Melanie—

Melanie! Scarlett went cold at the thought of her as she climbed the
stairs to her room. Melanie would hear of this. India had said she
would tell her. Oh, India would glory in telling her, not caring if she
blackened Ashley's name, not caring if she hurt Melanie, if by so doing
she could injure Scarlett! And Mrs. Elsing would talk too, even though
she had really seen nothing, because she was behind India and Archie in
the door of the lumber office. But she would talk, just the same. The
news would be all over town by supper time. Everyone, even the negroes,
would know by tomorrow's breakfast. At the party tonight, women would
gather in corners and whisper discreetly and with malicious pleasure.
Scarlett Butler tumbled from her high and mighty place! And the story
would grow and grow. There was no way of stopping it. It wouldn't stop
at the bare facts, that Ashley was holding her in his arms while she
cried. Before nightfall people would be saying she had been taken in
adultery. And it had been so innocent, so sweet! Scarlett thought
wildly: If we had been caught that Christmas of his furlough when I
kissed him good-by—if we had been caught in the orchard at Tara when I
begged him to run away with me—oh, if we'd been caught any of the
times when we were really guilty, it wouldn't be so bad! But now! Now!
When I went to his arms as a friend—

But no one would believe that. She wouldn't have a single friend to
take her part, not a single voice would be raised to say: "I don't
believe she was doing anything wrong." She had outraged old friends too
long to find a champion among them now. Her new friends, suffering in
silence under her insolences, would welcome a chance to blackguard her.
No, everybody would believe anything about her, though they might
regret that so fine a man as Ashley Wilkes was mixed up in so dirty an
affair. As usual they would cast the blame upon the woman and shrug at
the man's guilt. And in this case they would be right. She had gone
into his arms.

Oh, she could stand the cuts, the slights, the covert smiles,
anything the town might say, if she had to stand them—but not Melanie!
Oh, not Melanie! She did not know why she should mind Melanie knowing,
more than anyone else. She was too frightened and weighed down by a
sense of past guilt to try to understand it. But she burst into tears
at the thought of what would be in Melanie's eyes when India told her
that she had caught Ashley fondling Scarlett. And what would Melanie do
when she knew? Leave Ashley? What else could she do, with any dignity?
And what will Ashley and I do then? she thought frenziedly, the tears
streaming down her face. Oh, Ashley will die of shame and hate me for
bringing this on him. Suddenly her tears stopped short as a deadly fear
went through her heart. What of Rhett? What would he do?

Perhaps he'd never know. What was that old saying, that cynical
saying? "The husband is always the last to find out." Perhaps no one
would tell him. It would take a brave man to break such news to Rhett,
for Rhett had the reputation for shooting first and asking questions
afterwards. Please, God, don't let anybody be brave enough to tell him!
But she remembered the face of Archie in the lumber office, the cold,
pale eye, remorseless, full of hate for her and all women. Archie
feared neither God nor man and he hated loose women. He had hated them
enough to kill one. And he had said he would tell Rhett. And he'd tell
him in spite of all Ashley could do to dissuade him. Unless Ashley
killed him, Archie would tell Rhett, feeling it his Christian duty.

She pulled off her clothes and lay down on the bed, her mind
whirling round and round. If she could only lock her door and stay in
this safe place forever and ever and never see anyone again. Perhaps
Rhett wouldn't find out tonight. She'd say she had a headache and
didn't feel like going to the reception. By morning she would have
thought up some excuse to offer, some defense that might hold
water.

"I won't think of it now," she said desperately, burying her face in
the pillow. "I won't think of it now. I'll think of it later when I can
stand it."

She heard the servants come back as night fell and it seemed to her
that they were very silent as they moved about preparing supper. Or was
it her guilty conscience? Mammy came to the door and knocked but
Scarlett sent her away, saying she did not want any supper. Time passed
and finally she heard Rhett coming up the steps. She held herself
tensely as he reached the upper hall, gathered all her strength for a
meeting but he passed into his room. She breathed easier. He hadn't
heard. Thank God, he still respected her icy request that he never put
foot in her bedroom again, for if he saw her now, her face would give
her away. She must gather herself together enough to tell him that she
felt too ill to go to the reception. Well, there was time enough for
her to calm herself. Or was there time? Since the awful moment that
afternoon, life had seemed timeless. She heard Rhett moving about in
his room for a long time, speaking occasionally to Pork. Still she
could not find courage to call to him. She lay still on the bed in the
darkness, shaking.

After a long time, he knocked on her door and she said, trying to
control her voice: "Come in."

"Am I actually being invited into the sanctuary?" he questioned,
opening the door. It was dark and she could not see his face. Nor could
she make anything of his voice. He entered and closed the door.

"Are you ready for the reception?"

"I'm so sorry but I have a headache." How odd that her voice sounded
natural! Thank God for the dark! "I don't believe I'll go. You go,
Rhett, and give Melanie my regrets."

There was a long pause and he spoke drawlingly, bitingly in the
dark.

"What a white livered, cowardly little bitch you are."

He knew! She lay shaking, unable to speak. She heard him fumble in
the dark, strike a match and the room sprang into light. He walked over
to the bed and looked down at her. She saw that he was in evening
clothes.

"Get up," he said and there was nothing in his voice. "We are going
to the reception. You will have to hurry."

"Oh, Rhett, I can't. You see—"

"I can see. Get up."

"Rhett, did Archie dare—"

"Archie dared. A very brave man, Archie."

"You should have killed him for telling lies—"

"I have a strange way of not killing people who tell the truth.
There's no time to argue now. Get up."

She sat up, hugging her wrapper close to her, her eyes searching his
face. It was dark and impassive.

"I won't go, Rhett. I can't until this—misunderstanding is cleared
up."

"If you don't show your face tonight, you'll never be able to show
it in this town as long as you live. And while I may endure a trollop
for a wife, I won't endure a coward. You are going tonight, even if
everyone, from Alex Stephens down, cuts you and Mrs. Wilkes asks us to
leave the house."

"Rhett, let me explain."

"I don't want to hear. There isn't time. Get on your clothes."

"They misunderstood—India and Mrs. Elsing and Archie. And they hate
me so. India hates me so much that she'd even tell lies about her own
brother to make me appear in a bad light. If you'll only let me
explain—"

Oh, Mother of God, she thought in agony, suppose he says: "Pray do
explain!" What can I say? How can I explain?

"They'll have told everybody lies. I can't go tonight."

"You will go," he said, "if

=== SCENE 106 ===
rassed at such an
untoward performance.

"Hurts, does it?" He laughed shortly and she could not see his face.
"Pity it isn't around your neck."

Melanie's house blazed lights from every room and they could hear
the music far up the street. As they drew up in front, the pleasant
exciting sounds of many people enjoying themselves floated out. The
house was packed with guests. They overflowed on verandas and many were
sitting on benches in the dim lantern-hung yard.

I can't go in—I can't, thought Scarlett, sitting in the carriage,
gripping her balled-up handkerchief. I can't. I won't. I will jump out
and run away, somewhere, back home to Tara. Why did Rhett force me to
come here? What will people do? What will Melanie do? What will she
look like? Oh, I can't face her. I will run away.

As though he read her mind, Rhett's hand closed upon her arm in a
grip that would leave a bruise, the rough grip of a careless
stranger.

"I've never known an Irishman to be a coward. Where's your much-
vaunted courage?"

"Rhett, do please, let me go home and explain."

"You have eternity in which to explain and only one night to be a
martyr in the amphitheater. Get out, darling, and let me see the lions
eat you. Get out."

She went up the walk somehow, the arm she was holding as hard and
steady as granite, communicating to her some courage. By God, she could
face them and she would. What were they but a bunch of howling, clawing
cats who were jealous of her? She'd show them. She didn't care what
they thought. Only Melanie—only Melanie.

They were on the porch and Rhett was bowing right and left, his hat
in his hand, his voice cool and soft. The music stopped as they entered
and the crowd of people seemed to her confused mind to surge up to her
like the roar of the sea and then ebb away, with lessening,
ever-lessening sound. Was everyone going to cut her? Well, God's
nightgown, let them do it! Her chin went up and she smiled, the corners
of her eyes crinkling.

Before she could turn to speak to those nearest the door, someone
came through the press of people. There was an odd hush that caught
Scarlett's heart. Then through the lane came Melanie on small feet that
hurried, hurried to meet Scarlett at the door, to speak to her before
anyone else could speak. Her narrow shoulders were squared and her
small jaw set indignantly and, for all her notice, she might have had
no other guest but Scarlett. She went to her side and slipped an arm
about her waist.

"What a lovely dress, darling," she said in her small, clear voice.
"Will you be an angel? India was unable to come tonight and assist me.
Will you receive with me?"

CHAPTER LIV

Safe in her room again, Scarlett fell on the bed, careless of her
moire dress, bustle and roses. For a time she could only lie still and
think of standing between Melanie and Ashley, greeting guests. What a
horror! She would face Sherman's army again rather than repeat that
performance! After a time, she rose from the bed and nervously paced
the floor, shedding garments as she walked.

Reaction from strain set in and she began to shake. Hairpins slipped
out of her fingers and tinkled to the floor and when she tried to give
her hair its customary hundred strokes, she banged the back of the
brush hurtingly against her temple. A dozen times she tiptoed to the
door to listen for noises downstairs but the hall below lay like a
black silent pit.

Rhett had sent her home alone in the carriage when the party was
over and she had thanked God for the reprieve. He had not come in yet.
Thank God, he had not come in. She could not face him tonight, shamed,
frightened, shaking. But where was he? Probably at that creature's
place. For the first time, Scarlett was glad there was such a person as
Belle Watling. Glad there was some other place than this house to
shelter Rhett until his glittering, murderous mood had passed. That was
wrong, being glad a husband was at the house of a prostitute, but she
could not help it. She would be almost glad if he were dead, if it
meant she would not have to see him tonight.

Tomorrow—well, tomorrow was another day. Tomorrow she would think
of some excuse, some counter accusations, some way of putting Rhett in
the wrong. Tomorrow the memory of this hideous night would not be
driving her so fiercely that she shook. Tomorrow she would not be so
haunted by the memory of Ashley's face, his broken pride and his
shame—shame that she had caused, shame in which he had so little part.
Would he hate her now, her darling honorable Ashley, because she had
shamed him? Of course he would hate her now—now that they had both
been saved by the indignant squaring of Melanie's thin shoulders and
the love and outspoken trust which had been in her voice as she crossed
the glassy floor to slip her arm through Scarlett's and face the
curious, malicious, covertly hostile crowd. How neatly Melanie had
scotched the scandal, keeping Scarlett at her side all through the
dreadful evening! People had been a bit cool, somewhat bewildered, but
they had been polite.

Oh, the ignominy of it all, to be sheltered behind Melanie's skirts
from those who hated her, who would have torn her to bits with their
whispers! To be sheltered by Melanie's blind trust, Melanie of all
people!

Scarlett shook as with a chill at the thought. She must have a
drink, a number of drinks before she could lie down and hope to sleep.
She threw a wrapper about her gown and went hastily out into the dark
hall, her backless slippers making a great clatter in the stillness.
She was halfway down the stairs before she looked toward the closed
door of the dining room and saw a narrow line of light streaming from
under it. Her heart stopped for a moment. Had that light been burning
when she came home and had she been too upset to notice it? Or was
Rhett home after all? He could have come in quietly through the kitchen
door. If Rhett were home, she would tiptoe back to bed without her
brandy, much as she needed it. Then she wouldn't have to face him. Once
in her room she would be safe, for she could lock the door.

She was leaning over to pluck off her slippers, so she might hurry
back in silence, when the dining-room door swung open abruptly and
Rhett stood silhouetted against the dim candlelight behind him. He
looked huge, larger than she had ever seen him, a terrifying faceless
black bulk that swayed slightly on its feet.

"Pray join me, Mrs. Butler," he said and his voice was a little
thick.

He was drunk and showing it and she had never before seen him show
his liquor, no matter how much he drank. She paused irresolutely,
saying nothing and his arm went up in gesture of command.

"Come here, damn you!" he said roughly.

He must be very drunk, she thought with a fluttering heart. Usually,
the more he drank, the more polished became his manners. He sneered
more, his words were apt to be more biting, but the manner that
accompanied them was always punctilious—too punctilious.

"I must never let him know I'm afraid to face him," she thought,
and, clutching the wrapper closer to her throat, she went down the
stairs with her head up and her heels clacking noisily.

He stood aside and bowed her through the door with a mockery that
made her wince. She saw that he was coatless and his cravat hung down
on either side of his open collar. His shirt was open down to the thick
mat of black hair on his chest. His hair was rumpled and his eyes
bloodshot and narrow. One candle burned on the table, a tiny spark of
light that threw monstrous shadows about the high- ceilinged room and
made the massive sideboards and buffet look like still, crouching
beasts. On the table on the silver tray stood the decanter with
cut-glass stopper out, surrounded by glasses.

"Sit down," he said curtly, following her into the room.

Now a new kind of fear crept into her, a fear that made her alarm at
facing him seem very small. He looked and talked and acted like a
stranger. This was an ill-mannered Rhett she had never seen before.
Never at any time, even in most intimate moments, had he been other
than nonchalant. Even in anger, he was suave and satirical, and whisky
usually served to intensify these qualities. At first it had annoyed
her and she had tried to break down that nonchalance but soon she had
come to accept it as a very convenient thing. For years she had thought
that nothing mattered very much to him, that he thought everything in
life, including her, an ironic joke. But as she

=== SCENE 107 ===
ly is a fool but not the kind you think. It was obvious that
someone had told her but she didn't believe it. Even if she saw, she
wouldn't believe. There's too much honor in her to conceive of dishonor
in anyone she loves. I don't know what lie Ashley Wilkes told her—but
any clumsy one would do, for she loves Ashley and she loves you. I'm
sure I can't see why she loves you but she does. Let that be one of
your crosses."

"If you were not so drunk and insulting, I would explain
everything," said Scarlett, recovering some dignity. "But now—"

"I am not interested in your explanations. I know the truth better
than you do. By God, if you get up out of that chair just once
more—

"And what I find more amusing than even tonight's comedy is the fact
that while you have been so virtuously denying me the pleasures of your
bed because of my many sins, you have been lusting in your heart after
Ashley Wilkes. 'Lusting in your heart.' That's a good phrase, isn't it?
There are a number of good phrases in that Book, aren't there?"

"What book? What book?" her mind ran on, foolishly, irrelevantly as
she cast frantic eyes about the room, noting how dully the massive
silver gleamed in the dim light, how frighteningly dark the corners
were.

"And I was cast out because my coarse ardors were too much for your
refinement—because you didn't want any more children. How bad that
made me feel, dear heart! How it cut me! So I went out and found
pleasant consolation and left you to your refinements. And you spent
that time tracking the long-suffering Mr. Wilkes. God damn him, what
ails him? He can't be faithful to his wife with his mind or unfaithful
with his body. Why doesn't he make up his mind? You wouldn't object to
having his children, would you—and passing them off as mine?"

She sprang to her feet with a cry and he lunged from his seat,
laughing that soft laugh that made her blood cold. He pressed her back
into her chair with large brown hands and leaned over her.

"Observe my hands, my dear," he said, flexing them before her eyes.
"I could tear you to pieces with them with no trouble whatsoever and I
would do it if it would take Ashley out of your mind. But it wouldn't.
So I think I'll remove him from your mind forever, this way. I'll put
my hands, so, on each side of your head and I'll smash your skull
between them like a walnut and that will blot him out."

His hands were on her head, under her flowing hair, caressing, hard,
turning her face up to his. She was looking into the face of a
stranger, a drunken drawling-voiced stranger. She had never lacked
animal courage and in the face of danger it flooded back hotly into her
veins, stiffening her spine, narrowing her eyes.

"You drunken fool," she said. "Take your hands off me."

To her surprise, he did so and seating himself on the edge of the
table he poured himself another drink.

"I have always admired your spirit, my dear. Never more than now
when you are cornered."

She drew her wrapper close about her body. Oh, if she could only
reach her room and turn the key in the stout door and be alone.
Somehow, she must stand him off, bully him into submission, this Rhett
she had never seen before. She rose without haste, though her knees
shook, tightened the wrapper across her hips and threw back her hair
from her face.

"I'm not cornered," she said cuttingly. "You'll never corner me,
Rhett Butler, or frighten me. You are nothing but a drunken beast who's
been with bad women so long that you can't understand anything else but
badness. You can't understand Ashley or me. You've lived in dirt too
long to know anything else. You are jealous of something you can't
understand. Good night."

She turned casually and started toward the door and a burst of
laughter stopped her. She turned and he swayed across the room toward
her. Name of God, if he would only stop that terrible laugh!

=== SCENE 108 ===
? Oh, I've known that all along. All these years. How do I know? Oh,
well, I know Ashley Wilkes and his breed. I know he is honorable and a
gentleman. And that, my dear, is more than I can say for you—or for
me, for that matter. We are not gentlemen and we have no honor, have
we? That's why we flourish like green bay trees."

"Let me go. I won't stand here and be insulted."

"I'm not insulting you. I'm praising your physical virtue. And it
hasn't fooled me one bit. You think men are such fools, Scarlett. It
never pays to underestimate your opponent's strength and intelligence.
And I'm not a fool. Don't you suppose I know that you've lain in my
arms and pretended I was Ashley Wilkes?"

Her jaw dropped and fear and astonishment were written plainly in
her face.

"Pleasant thing, that. Rather ghostly, in fact. Like having three in
a bed where there ought to be just two." He shook her shoulders, ever
so slightly, hiccoughed and smiled mockingly.

"Oh, yes, you've been faithful to me because Ashley wouldn't have
you. But, hell, I wouldn't have grudged him your body. I know how
little bodies mean—especially women's bodies. But I do grudge him your
heart and your dear, hard, unscrupulous, stubborn mind. He doesn't want
your mind, the fool, and I don't want your body. I can buy women cheap.
But I do want your mind and your heart, and I'll never have them, any
more than you'll ever have Ashley's mind. And that's why I'm sorry for
you."

Even through her fear and bewilderment, his sneer stung.

"Sorry—for me?"

"Yes, sorry because you're such a child, Scarlett. A child crying
for the moon. What would a child do with the moon if it got it? And
what would you do with Ashley? Yes, I'm sorry for you—sorry to see you
throwing away happiness with both hands and reaching out for something
that would never make you happy. I'm sorry because you are such a fool
you don't know there can't ever be happiness except when like mates
like. If I were dead, if Miss Melly were dead and you had your precious
honorable lover, do you think you'd be happy with him? Hell, no! You
would never know him, never know what he was thinking about, never
understand him any more than you understand music and poetry and books
or anything that isn't dollars and cents. Whereas, we, dear wife of my
bosom, could have been perfectly happy if you had ever given us half a
chance, for we are so much alike. We are both scoundrels, Scarlett, and
nothing is beyond us when we want something. We could have been happy,
for I loved you and I know you, Scarlett, down to your bones, in a way
that Ashley could never know you. And he would despise you if he did
know...But no, you must go mooning all your life after a man you
cannot understand. And I, my darling, will continue to moon after
whores. And, I dare say we'll do better than most couples."

He released her abruptly and made a weaving way back toward the
decanter. For a moment, Scarlett stood rooted, thoughts tearing in and
out of her mind so swiftly that she could seize none of them long
enough to examine them. Rhett had said he loved her. Did he mean it? Or
was he merely drunk? Or was this one of his horrible jokes? And
Ashley—the moon—crying for the moon. She ran swiftly into the dark
hall, fleeing as though demons were upon her. Oh, if she could only
reach her room! She turned her ankle and the slipper fell half off. As
she stopped to kick it loose frantically, Rhett, running lightly as an
Indian, was beside her in the dark. His breath was not on her face and
his hands went round her roughly, under the wrapper, against her bare
skin.

"You turned me out on the town while you chased him. By God, this is
one night when there are only going to be two in my bed."

He swung her off her feet into his arms and started up the stairs.
Her head was crushed against his chest and she heard the hard hammering
of his heart beneath her ears. He hurt her and she cried out, muffled,
frightened. Up the stairs he went in the utter darkness, up, up, and
she was wild with fear. He was a mad stranger and this was a black
darkness she did not know, darker than death. He was like death,
carrying her away in arms that hurt. She screamed, stifled against him
and he stopped suddenly on the landing and, turning her swiftly in his
arms, bent over and kissed her with a savagery and a completeness that
wiped out everything from her mind but the dark into which she was
sinking and the lips on hers. He was shaking, as though he stood in a
strong wind, and his lips, traveling from her mouth downward to where
the wrapper had fallen from her body, fell on her soft flesh. He was
muttering things she did not hear, his lips were evoking feelings never
felt before. She was darkness and he was darkness and there had never
been anything before this time, only darkness and his lips upon her.
She tried to speak and his mouth was over hers again. Suddenly she had
a wild thrill such as she had never known; joy, fear, madness,
excitement, surrender to arms that were too strong, lips too bruising,
fate that moved too fast. For the first time in her life she had met
someone, something stronger than she, someone she could neither bully
nor break, someone who was bullying and breaking her. Somehow, her arms
were around his neck and her lips trembling beneath his and they were
going up, up into the darkness again, a darkness that was soft and
swirling and all enveloping.


When she awoke the next morning, he was gone and had it not been for
the rumpled pillow beside her, she would have thought the happenings of
the night before a wild preposterous dream. She went crimson at the
memory and, pulling the bed covers up about her neck, lay bathed in
sunlight, trying to sort out the jumbled impressions in her mind.

Two things stood to the fore. She had lived for years with Rhett,
slept with him, eaten with him, quarreled with him and borne his
child—and yet, she did not know him. The man who had carried her up
the dark stairs was a stranger of whose existence she had not dreamed.
And now, though she tried to make herself hate him, tried to be
indignant, she could not. He had humbled her, hurt her, used her
brutally through a wild mad night and she had gloried in it.

Oh, she should be ashamed, should shrink from the very memory of the
hot swirling darkness! A lady, a real lady, could never hold up her
head after such a night. But, stronger than shame, was the memory of
rapture, of the ecstasy of surrender. For the first time in her life
she had felt alive, felt passion as sweeping and primitive as the fear
she had known the night she fled Atlanta, as dizzy sweet as the cold
hate when she had shot the Yankee.

Rhett loved her! At least, he said he loved her and how could she
doubt it now? How odd and bewildering and how incredible that he loved
her, this savage stranger with whom she had lived in such coolness. She
was not altogether certain how she felt about this revelation but as an
idea came to her she suddenly laughed aloud. He loved her and so she
had him at last. She had almost forgotten her early desire to entrap
him into loving her, so she could hold the whip over his insolent black
head. Now, it came back and it gave her great satisfaction. For one
night, he had had her at his mercy but now she knew the weakness of his
armor. From now on she had him where she wanted him. She had smarted
under his jeers for a long time, but now she had him where she could
make him jump through any hoops she cared to hold.

When she thought of meeting him again, face to face in the sober
light of day, a nervous tingling embarrassment that carried with it an
exciting pleasure enveloped her.

"I'm nervous as a bride," she thought. "And about Rhett!" And, at
the idea she fell to giggling foolishly.

But Rhett did not appear for dinner, nor was he at his place at the
supper table. The night passed, a long night during which she lay awake
until dawn, her ears strained to hear his key in the latch. But he did
not come. When the second day passed with no word from him, she was
frantic with disappointment and fear. She went by the bank but he was
not there. She went to the store and was very sharp with everyone, for
every time the door opened to admit a customer she looked up with a
flutter, hoping it was Rhett. She went to the lumber yard and bullied
Hugh until he hid himself behind a pile of lumber. But Rhett did not
seek her there.

She could not humble herself to ask friends if they had seen him.
She could not make inquiries among the servants for news of him. But
she felt they knew something she did not know. Negroes always knew
everything. Mammy was unusually silent those two days. She watched
Scarlett out of the corner of her eye and said nothing. When the second
night had passed Scarlett made up her mind to go to the police. Perhaps
he had had an accident, perhaps his horse had thrown him and he was
lying helpless in some ditch. Perhaps—oh, horrible thought—perhaps he
was dead.

The next morning when she had finished her breakfast and was in her
room putting on her bonnet, she heard swift feet on the stairs. As she
sank to the bed in weak thankfulness, Rhett entered the room. He was
freshly barbered, shaved and massaged and he was sober, but his eyes
were bloodshot and his face puffy from drink. He waved an airy hand at
her and said: "Oh, hello."

How could a man say "Oh, hello," after being gone without
explanation for two days? How could he be so nonchalant with the memory
of such a night as they had spent? He couldn't unless— unless—the
terrible thought leaped into her mind. Unless such nights were the
usual thing to him. For a moment she c

=== SCENE 109 ===
room on swift feet. She heard him cross the floor of the hall to the
children's play room and open the door. There was a glad, quick treble
of childish voices and she heard Bonnie's tones rise over Ella's.

"Daddy, where you been?"

"Hunting for a rabbit's skin to wrap my little Bonnie in. Give your
best sweetheart a kiss, Bonnie—and you too, Ella."

CHAPTER LV

"Darling, I don't want any explanation from you and I won't listen
to one," said Melanie firmly as she gently laid a small hand across
Scarlett's tortured lips and stilled her words. "You insult yourself
and Ashley and me by even thinking there could be need of explanations
between us. Why, we three have been—have been like soldiers fighting
the world together for so many years that I'm ashamed of you for
thinking idle gossip could come between us. Do you think I'd believe
that you and my Ashley— Why, the idea! Don't you realize I know you
better than anyone in the world knows you? Do you think I've forgotten
all the wonderful, unselfish things you've done for Ashley and Beau and
me—everything from saving my life to keeping us from starving! Do you
think I could remember you walking in a furrow behind that Yankee's
horse almost barefooted and with your hands blistered—just so the baby
and I could have something to eat—and then believe such dreadful
things about you? I don't want to hear a word out of you, Scarlett
O'Hara. Not a word."

"But—" Scarlett fumbled and stopped.

Rhett had left town the hour before with Bonnie and Prissy, and
desolation was added to Scarlett's shame and anger. The additional
burden of her guilt with Ashley and Melanie's defense was more than she
could bear. Had Melanie believed India and Archie, cut her at the
reception or even greeted her frigidly, then she could have held her
head high and fought back with every weapon in her armory. But now,
with the memory of Melanie standing between her and social ruin,
standing like a thin, shining blade, with trust and a fighting light in
her eyes, there seemed nothing honest to do but confess. Yes, blurt out
everything from that far-off beginning on the sunny porch at Tara.

She was driven by a conscience which, though long suppressed, could
still rise up, an active Catholic conscience. "Confess your sins and do
penance for them in sorrow and contrition," Ellen had told her a
hundred times and, in this crisis, Ellen's religious training came back
and gripped her. She would confess—yes, everything, every look and
word, those few caresses—and then God would ease her pain and give her
peace. And, for her penance, there would be the dreadful sight of
Melanie's face changing from fond love and trust to incredulous horror
and repulsion. Oh, that was too hard a penance, she thought in anguish,
to have to live out her life remembering Melanie's face, knowing that
Melanie knew all the pettiness, the meanness, the two-faced disloyalty
and the hypocrisy that were in her.

Once, the thought of flinging the truth tauntingly in Melanie's face
and seeing the collapse of her fool's paradise had been an intoxicating
one, a gesture worth everything she might lose thereby. But now, all
that had changed overnight and there was nothing she desired less. Why
this should be she did not know. There was too great a tumult of
conflicting ideas in her mind for her to sort them out. She only knew
that as she had once desired to keep her mother thinking her modest,
kind, pure of heart, so she now passionately desired to keep Melanie's
high opinion. She only knew that she did not care what the world
thought of her or what Ashley or Rhett thought of her, but Melanie must
not think her other than she had always thought her.

She dreaded to tell Melanie the truth but one of her rare honest
instincts arose, an instinct that would not let her masquerade in false
colors before the woman who had fought her battles for her. So she had
hurried to Melanie that morning, as soon as Rhett and Bonnie had left
the house.

But at her first tumbled-out words: "Melly, I must explain about the
other day—" Melanie had imperiously stopped her. Scarlett looking
shamefaced into the dark eyes that were flashing with love and anger,
knew with a sinking heart that the peace and calm following confession
could never be hers. Melanie had forever cut off that line of action by
her first words. With one of the few adult emotions Scarlett had ever
had, she realized that to unburden her own tortured heart would be the
purest selfishness. She would be ridding herself of her burden and
laying it on the heart of an innocent and trusting person. She owed
Melanie a debt for her championship and that debt could only be paid
with silence. What cruel payment it would be to wreck Melanie's life
with the unwelcome knowledge that her husband was unfaithful to her,
and her beloved friend a party to it!

"I can't tell her," she thought miserably. "Never, not even if my
conscience kills me." She remembered irrelevantly Rhett's drunken
remark: "She can't conceive of dishonor in anyone she loves...let
that be your cross."

Yes, it would be her cross, until she died, to keep this torment
silent within her, to wear the hair shirt of shame, to feel it chafing
her at every tender look and gesture Melanie would make throughout the
years, to subdue forever the impulse to cry: "Don't be so kind! Don't
fight for me! I'm not worth it!"

"If you only weren't such a fool, such a sweet, trusting, simple-
minded fool, it wou

=== SCENE 110 ===
shley's sister
but I think her mind has broken with thinking so much! There's no other
explanation for her action...I told her never to put foot in this
house again and that if I heard her breathe so vile an insinuation I
would—I would call her a liar in public!"

Melanie stopped speaking and abruptly the anger left her face and
sorrow swamped it. Melanie had all that passionate clan loyalty
peculiar to Georgians and the thought of a family quarrel tore her
heart. She faltered for a moment. But Scarlett was dearest, Scarlett
came first in her heart, and she went on loyally:

"She's always been jealous because I loved you best, dear. She'll
never come in this house again and I'll never put foot under any roof
that receives her. Ashley agrees with me, but it's just about broken
his heart that his own sister should tell such a—"

At the mention of Ashley's name, Scarlett's overwrought nerves gave
way and she burst into tears. Would she never stop stabbing him to the
heart? Her only thought had been to make him happy and safe but at
every turn she seemed to hurt him. She had wrecked his life, broken his
pride and self-respect, shattered that inner peace, that calm based on
integrity. And now she had alienated him from the sister he loved so
dearly. To save her own reputation and his wife's happiness, India had
to be sacrificed, forced into the light of a lying, half-crazed,
jealous old maid—India who was absolutely justified in every suspicion
she had ever harbored and every accusing word she had uttered. Whenever
Ashley looked into India's eyes, he would see the truth shining there,
truth and reproach and the cold contempt of which the Wilkeses were
masters.

Knowing how Ashley valued honor above his life, Scarlett knew he
must be writhing. He, like Scarlett, was forced to shelter behind
Melanie's skirts. While Scarlett realized the necessity for this and
knew that the blame for his false position lay mostly at her own door,
still—still— Womanlike she would have respected Ashley more, had he
shot Archie and admitted everything to Melanie and the world. She knew
she was being unfair but she was too miserable to care for such fine
points. Some of Rhett's taunting words of contempt came back to her and
she wondered if indeed Ashley had played the manly part in this mess.
And, for the first time, some of the bright glow which had enveloped
him since the first day she fell in love with him began to fade
imperceptibly. The tarnish of shame and guilt that enveloped her spread
to him as well. Resolutely she tried to fight off this thought but it
only made her cry harder.

"Don't! Don't!" cried Melanie, dropping her tatting and flinging
herself onto the sofa and drawing Scarlett's head down onto her
shoulder. "I shouldn't have talked about it all and distressed you so.
I know how dreadfully you must feel and we'll never mention it again.
No, not to each other or to anybody. It'll be as though it never
happened. But," she added with quiet venom, "I'm going to show India
and Mrs. Elsing what's what. They needn't think they can spread lies
about my husband and my sister-in-law. I'm going to fix it so neither
of them can hold up their heads in Atlanta. And anybody who believes
them or receives them is my enemy."

Scarlett, looking sorrowfully down the long vista of years to come,
knew that she was the cause of a feud that would split the town and the
family for generations.


Melanie was as good as her word. She never again mentioned the
subject to Scarlett or to Ashley. Nor, for that matter, would she
discuss it with anyone. She maintained an air of cool indifference that
could speedily change to icy formality if anyone even dared hint about
the matter. During the weeks that followed her surprise party, while
Rhett was mysteriously absent and the town in a frenzied state of
gossip, excitement and partisanship, she gave no quarter to Scarlett's
detractors, whether they were her old friends or her blood kin. She did
not speak, she acted.

She stuck by Scarlett's side like a cocklebur. She made Scarlett go
to the store and the lumber yard, as usual, every morning and she went
with her. She insisted that Scarlett go driving in the afternoons,
little though Scarlett wished to expose herself to the eager c

=== SCENE 111 ===
hans of the Confederacy, the Association for the Beautification of
the Graves of Our Glorious Dead, the Saturday Night Musical Circle, the
Ladies' Evening Cotillion Society, the Young Men's Library were all
involved. So were four churches with their Ladies' Aid and Missionary
societies. Great care had to be taken to avoid putting members of
warring factions on the same committees.

On their regular afternoons at home, Atlanta matrons were in anguish
from four to six o'clock for fear Melanie and Scarlett would call at
the same time India and her loyal kin were in their parlors.

Of all the family, poor Aunt Pitty suffered the most. Pitty, who
desired nothing except to live comfortably amid the love of her
relatives, would have been very pleased, in this matter, to run with
the hares and hunt with the hounds. But neither the hares nor the
hounds would permit this.

India lived with Aunt Pitty and, if Pitty sided with Melanie, as she
wished to do, India would leave. And if India left her, what would poor
Pitty do then? She could not live alone. She would have to get a
stranger to live with her or she would have to close up her house and
go and live with Scarlett. Aunt Pitty felt vaguely that Captain Butler
would not care for this, or she would have to go and live with Melanie
and sleep in the little cubbyhole that was Beau's nursery.

Pitty was not overly fond of India, for India intimidated her with
her dry, stiff-necked ways and her passionate convictions. But she made
it possible for Pitty to keep her own comfortable establishment and
Pitty was always swayed more by considerations of personal comfort than
by moral issues. And so India remained.

But her presence in the house made Aunt Pitty a storm center, for
both Scarlett and Melanie took that to mean that she sided with India.
Scarlett curtly refused to contribute more money to Pitty's
establishment as long as India was under the same roof. Ashley sent
India money every week and every week India proudly and silently
returned it, much to the old lady's alarm and regret. Finances at the
red-brick house would have been in a deplorable state, but for Uncle
Henry's intervention, and it humiliated Pitty to take money from
him.

Pitty loved Melanie better than anyone in the world, except herself,
and now Melly acted like a cool, polite stranger. Though she
practically lived in Pitty's back yard, she never once came through the
hedge and she used to run in and out a dozen times a day. Pitty called
on her and wept and protested her love and devotion, but Melanie always
refused to discuss matters and never returned the calls.

Pitty knew very well what she owed Scarlett—almost her very
existence. Certainly in those black days after the war when Pitty was
faced with the alternative of Brother Henry or starvation, Scarlett had
kept her home for her, fed her, clothed her and enabled her to hold up
her head in Atlanta society. And since Scarlett had married and moved
into her own home, she had been generosity itself. And that frightening
fascinating Captain Butler—frequently after he called with Scarlett,
Pitty found brand-new purses stuffed with bills on her console table or
lace handkerchiefs knotted about gold pieces which had been slyly
slipped into her sewing box. Rhett always vowed he knew nothing about
them and accused her, in a very unrefined way, of having a secret
admirer, usually the be-whiskered Grandpa Merriwether.

Yes, Pitty owed love to Melanie, security to Scarlett, and what did
she owe India? Nothing, except that India's presence kept her from
having to break up her pleasant life and make decisions for herself. It
was all most distressing and too, too vulgar and Pitty, who had never
made a decision for herself in her whole life, simply let matters go on
as they were and as a result spent much time in uncomforted tears.

In the end, some people believed whole-heartedly in Scarlett's
innocence, not because of her own personal virtue but because Melanie
believed in it. Some had mental reservations but they were courteous to
Scarlett and called on her because they loved Melanie and wished to
keep her love. India's adherents bowed coldly and some few cut her
openly. These last were embarrassing, infuriating, but Scarlett
realized that, except for Melanie's championship and her quick action,
the face of the whole town would have been set against her and she
would have been an outcast.

CHAPTER LVI

Rhett was gone for three months and during that time Scarlett had no
word from him. She did not know where he was or how long he would be
gone. Indeed, she had no idea if he would ever return. During this
time, she went about her business with her head high and her heart
sick. She did not feel well physically but, forced by Melanie, she went
to the store every day and tried to keep up a superficial interest in
the mills. But the store palled on her for the first time and, although
the business was treble what it had been the year before and the money
rolling in, she could take no interest in it and was sharp and cross
with the clerks. Johnnie Gallegher's mill was thriving and the lumber
yard selling all his supply easily, but nothing Johnnie did or said
pleased her. Johnnie, as Irish as she, finally erupted into rage at her
naggings and threatened to quit, after a long tirade which ended with
"and the back of both me hands to you, Ma'm, and the curse of Cromwell
on you." She had to appease him with the most abject of apologies.

She never went to Ashley's mill. Nor did she go to the lumber-yard
office when she thought he would be there. She knew he was avoiding
her, knew that her constant presence in his house, at Melanie's
inescapable invitations, was a torment to him. They never spoke alone
and she was desperate to question him. She wanted to know whether he
now hated her and exactly what he had told Melanie, but he held her at
arm's length and silently pleaded with her not to speak. The sight of
his face, old, haggard with remorse, added to her load, and the fact
that his mill lost money every week was an extra irritant which she
could not voice.

His helplessness in the face of the present situation irked her. She
did not know what he could do to better matters but she felt that he
should do something. Rhett would have done something. Rhett always did
something, even if it was the wrong thing, and she unwillingly
respected him for it.

Now that her first rage at Rhett and his insults had passed, she
began to miss him and she missed him more and more as days went by
without news of him. Out of the welter of rapture and anger and
heartbreak and hurt pride that he had left, depression emerged to sit
upon her shoulder like a carrion crow. She missed him, missed his light
flippant touch in anecdotes that made her shout with laughter, his
sardonic grin that reduced troubles to their proper proportions, missed
even his jeers that stung her to angry retort. Most of all she missed
having him to tell things to. Rhett was so satisfactory in that
respect. She could recount shamelessly and with pride how she had
skinned people out of their eyeteeth and he would applaud. And if she
even mentioned such things to other people they were shocked.

She was lonely without him and Bonnie. She missed the child more
than she had thought possible. Remembering the last harsh words Rhett
had hurled at her about Wade and Ella, she tried to fill in some of her
empty hours with them. But it was no use. Rhett's words and the
children's reactions opened her eyes to a startling, a galling truth.
During the babyhood of each child she had been too busy, too worried
with money matters, too sharp and easily vexed, to win their confidence
or affection. And now, it was either too late or she did not have the
patience or the wisdom to penetrate their small secretive hearts.

Ella! It annoyed Scarlett to realize that Ella was a silly child but
she undoubtedly was. She couldn't keep her little mind on one subject
any longer than a bird could stay on one twig and even when Scarlett
tried to tell her stories, Ella went off at childish tangents,
interrupting with questions about matters that had nothing to do with
the story and forgetting what she had asked long before Scarlett could
get the explanation out of her mouth. And as for Wade—perhaps Rhett
was right. Perhaps he was afraid of her. That was odd and it hurt her.
Why should her own boy, her only boy, be afraid of her? When she tried
to draw him out in talk, he looked at her with Charles' soft brown eyes
and squirmed and twisted his feet in embarrassment. But with Melanie,
he bubbled over with talk and brought from his pocket everything from
fishing worms to old strings to show her.

Melanie had a way with brats. There was no getting around it. Her
own little Beau was the best behaved and most lovable child in Atlanta.
Scarlett got on better with him than she did with her own son because
little Beau had no self-consciousness where grown people were concerned
and climbed on her knee, uninvited, whenever he saw her. What a
beautiful blond boy he was, just like Ashley! Now if only Wade were
like Beau— Of course, the reason Melanie could do so much with him was
that she had only one child and she hadn't had to worry and work as
Scarlett had. At least, Scarlett tried to excuse herself that way but
honesty forced her to admit that Melanie loved children and would have
welcomed a dozen. And the over-brimming affection she had was poured
out on Wade and the neighbors' broods.

Scarlett would never forget the shock of the day she drove by
Melanie's house to pick up Wade and heard, as she came up the front
walk, the sound of her son's voice raised in a very fair imitation of
the Rebel Yell—Wade who was always as still as a mouse at home. And
manfully seconding Wade's yell was the shrill piping of Beau. When she
had walked into the sitting room she had found the two charging at the
sofa with wooden swords. They had hushed abashed as she entered and
Melanie had arisen, laughing and clutching at hairpins and flying curls
from where she was crouching behind the sofa.

"It's Gettysburg," she explained. "And I'm the Yankees and I've
gotten the worst of it. This is General Lee," pointing to Beau, "and
this is General Pickett," putting an arm about Wade's shoulder.

Yes, Melanie had a way with children that Scarlett could never
fathom.

"At least," she thought, "Bonnie loves me and likes to play with
me." But honesty forced her to admit that Bonnie infinitely preferred
Rhett to her. And perhaps she would never see Bonnie again. For all she
knew, Rhett might be in Perisa or Egypt and intending to stay there
forever.

When Dr. Meade told her she was pregnant, she was astounded, for she
had been expecting a diagnosis of biliousness and over-wrought nerves.
Then her mind fled back to that wild night and her face went crimson at
the memory. So a child was coming from those moments of high
rapture—even if the memory of the rapture was dimmed by what followed.
And for the first time she was glad that she was going to have a child.
If it were only a boy! A fine boy, not a spiritless little creature
like Wade. How she would care for him! Now that she had the leisure to
devote to a baby and the money to smooth his path, how happy she would
be! She had an impulse to write to Rhett in care of his mother in
Charleston and tell him. Good Heavens, he must come home now! Suppose
he stayed away till after the baby was born! She could never explain
that! But if she wrote him he'd think she wanted him to come home and
he would be amused. And he mustn't ever think she wanted him or needed
him.

She was very glad she had stifled this impulse when her first news
of Rhett came in a letter from Aunt Pauline in Charleston where, it
seemed, Rhett was visiting his mother. What a relief to know he was
still in the United States, even if Aunt Pauline's letter was
infuriating. Rhett had brought Bonnie to see her and Aunt Eulalie and
the letter was full of praise.

"Such a little beauty! When she grows up she will certainly be a
belle. But I suppose you know that any man who courts her will have a
tussle with Captain Butler, for I never saw such a devoted father. Now,
my dear, I wish to confess something. Until I met Captain Butler, I
felt that your marriage with him had been a dreadful mesalliance for,
of course, no one in Charleston hears anything good about him and

=== SCENE 112 ===
h reluctance he told us that you spent your mornings at the
store and would permit no one else to do the bookkeeping. He also
admitted that you had some interest in a mill or mills (we did not
press him on this, being most upset at this information which was news
to us) that necessitated your riding about alone, or attended by a
ruffian who, Captain Butler assures us, is a murderer. We could see how
this wrung his heart and think he must be a most indulgent—in fact, a
far too indulgent husband. Scarlett, this must stop. Your mother is not
here to command you and I must do it in her place. Think how your
little children will feel when they grow older and realize that you
were in trade! How mortified they will be to know that you exposed
yourself to the insults of rude men and the dangers of careless gossip
in attending to mills. Such unwomanly—"

Scarlett flung down the letter unfinished, with an oath. She could
just see Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie sitting in judgment on her in
the crumbling house on the Battery with little between them and
starvation except what she, Scarlett, sent them every month. Unwomanly?
By God, if she hadn't been unwomanly Aunt Pauline and Aunt Eulalie
probably wouldn't have a roof over their heads this very moment. And
damn Rhett for telling them about the store and the bookkeeping and the
mills! Reluctant, was he? She knew very well the joy he took in palming
himself off on the old ladies as grave, courteous and charming, the
devoted husband and father. How he must have loved harrowing them with
descriptions of her activities with the store, the mills, the saloon.
What a devil he was. Why did such perverse things give him such
pleasure?

But soon, even this rage passed into apathy. So much of the keen
zest had gone out of life recently. If only she could recapture the
thrill and the glow of Ashley—if only Rhett would come home and make
her laugh.


They were home again, without warning. The first intimation of their
return was the sound of luggage being thumped on the front- hall floor
and Bonnie's voice crying, "Mother!"

Scarlett hurried from her room to the top of the stairs and saw her
daughter stretching her short plump legs in an effort to climb the
steps. A resigned striped kitten was clutched to her breast.

"Gran'ma gave him to me," she cried excitedly, holding the kitten
out by the scruff.

Scarlett swept her up into her arms and kissed her, thankful that
the child's presence spared her her first meeting alone with Rhett.
Looking over Bonnie's head, she saw him in the hall below, paying the
cab driver. He looked up, saw her and swept off his hat in a wide
gesture, bowing as he did. When she met his dark eyes, her heart
leaped. No matter what he was, no matter what he had done, he was home
and she was glad.

"Where's Mammy?" asked Bonnie, wriggling in Scarlett's grasp and she
reluctantly set the child on her feet.

It was going to be more difficult than she anticipated, greeting
Rhett with just the proper degree of casualness and, as for telling him
about the new baby! She looked at his face as he came up the steps,
that dark nonchalant face, so impervious, so blank. No, she'd wait to
tell him. She couldn't tell him right away. And yet, such tidings as
these belonged first to a husband, for a husband was always happy to
hear them. But she did not think he would be happy about it.

She stood on the landing, leaning against the banisters and wondered
if he would kiss her.

=== SCENE 113 ===
led movement, he sidestepped, throwing up his arm
to ward her off. She was standing on the edge of the freshly waxed top
step, and as her arm with the whole weight of her body behind it,
struck his out-thrust arm, she lost her balance. She made a wild clutch
for the newel post and missed it. She went down the stairs backwards,
feeling a sickening dart of pain in her ribs as she landed. And, too
dazed to catch herself, she rolled over and over to the bottom of the
flight.


It was the first time Scarlett had ever been ill, except when she
had her babies, and somehow those times did not count. She had not been
forlorn and frightened then, as she was now, weak and pain racked and
bewildered. She knew she was sicker than they dared tell her, feebly
realized that she might die. The broken rib stabbed when she breathed,
her bruised face and head ached and her whole body was given over to
demons who plucked at her with hot pinchers and sawed on her with dull
knives and left her, for short intervals, so drained of strength that
she could not regain grip on herself before they returned. No,
childbirth had not been like this. She had been able to eat hearty
meals two hours after Wade and Ella and Bonnie had been born, but now
the thought of anything but cool water brought on feeble nausea.

How easy it was to have a child and how painful not to have one!
Strange, what a pang it had been even in her pain, to know that she
would not have this child. Stranger still that it should have been the
first child she really wanted. She tried to think why she wanted it but
her mind was too tired. Her mind was too tired to think of anything
except fear of death. Death was in the room and she had no strength to
confront it, to fight it back and she was frightened. She wanted
someone strong to stand by her and hold her hand and fight off death
until enough strength came back for her to do her own fighting.

Rage had been swallowed up in pain and she wanted Rhett. But he was
not there and she could not bring herself to ask for him.

Her last memory of him was how he looked as he picked her up in the
dark hall at the bottom of the steps, his face white and wiped clean of
all save hideous fear, his voice hoarsely calling for Mammy. And then
there was a faint memory of being carried upstairs, before darkness
came over her mind. And then pain and more pain and the room full of
buzzing voices and Aunt Pittypat's sobs and Dr. Meade's brusque orders
and f

=== SCENE 114 ===
ptoes in the upper hall. And
then like a blinding ray of lightning, the knowledge of death and fear
that suddenly made her try to scream a name and the scream was only a
whisper.

But that forlorn whisper brought instant response from somewhere in
the darkness beside the bed and the soft voice of the one she called
made answer in lullaby tones: "I'm here, dear. I've been right here all
the time."

Death and fear receded gently as Melanie took her hand and laid it
quietly against her cool cheek. Scarlett tried to turn to see her face
and could not. Melly was having a baby and the Yankees were coming. The
town was afire and she must hurry, hurry. But Melly was having a baby
and she couldn't hurry. She must stay with her till the baby came and
be strong because Melly needed her strength. Melly was hurting so
bad—there were hot pinchers at her and dull knives and recurrent waves
of pain. She must hold Melly's hand.

But Dr. Meade was there after all, he had come, even if the soldiers
at the depot did need him for she heard him say: "Delirious. Where's
Captain Butler?"

The night was dark and then light and sometimes she was having a
baby and sometimes it was Melanie who cried out, but through it all
Melly was there and her hands were cool and she did not make futile
anxious gestures or sob like Aunt Pitty. Whenever Scarlett opened her
eyes, she said "Melly?" and the voice answered. And usually she started
to whisper: "Rhett—I want Rhett" and remembered, as from a dream, that
Rhett didn't want her, that Rhett's face was dark as an Indian's and
his teeth were white in a jeer. She wanted him and he didn't want
her.

Once she said "Melly?" and Mammy's voice said: "S'me, chile," and
put a cold rag on her forehead and she cried fretfully: "Melly—
Melanie" over and over but for a long time Melanie did not come. For
Melanie was sitting on the edge of Rhett's bed and Rhett, drunk and
sobbing, was sprawled on the floor, crying, his head in her lap.

Every time she had come out of Scarlett's room she had seen him,
sitting on his bed, his door wide, watching the door across the hall.
The room was untidy, littered with cigar butts and dishes of untouched
food. The bed was tumbled and unmade and he sat on it, unshaven and
suddenly gaunt, endlessly smoking. He never asked questions when he saw
her. She always stood in the doorway for a minute, giving the news:
"I'm sorry, she's worse," or "No, she hasn't asked for you yet. You
see, she's delirious" or "You mustn't give up hope, Captain Butler. Let
me fix you some hot coffee and something to eat. You'll make yourself
ill."

Her heart always ached with pity for him, although she was almost
too tired and sleepy to feel anything. How could people say such mean
things about him—say he was heartless and wicked and unfaithful to
Scarlett, when she could see him getting thin before her eyes, see the
torment in his face? Tired as she was, she always tried to be kinder
than usual when she gave bulletins from the sick room. He looked so
like a damned soul waiting judgment— so like a child in a suddenly
hostile world. But everyone was like a child to Melanie.

But when, at last, she went joyfully to his door to tell him that
Scarlett was better, she was unprepared for what she found. There was a
half-empty bottle of whisky on the table by the bed and the room reeked
with the odor. He looked at her with bright glazed eyes and his jaw
muscles trembled despite his efforts to set his teeth.

"She's dead?"

"Oh, no. She's much better."

He said: "Oh, my God," and put his head in his hands. She saw his
wide shoulders shake as with a nervous chill and, as she watched him
pityingly, her pity changed to horror for she saw that he was crying.
Melanie had never seen a man cry and of all men, Rhett, so suave, so
mocking, so eternally sure of himself.

It frightened her, the desperate choking sound he made. She had a
terrified thought that he was drunk and Melanie was afraid of
drunkenness. But when he raised his head and she caught one glimpse of
his eyes, she stepped swiftly into the room, closed the door softly
behind her and went to him. She had never seen a man cry but she had
comforted the tears of many children. When she put a soft hand on his
shoulder, his arms went suddenly a

=== SCENE 115 ===
d with horror as she
looked down at the black tormented head writhing in her lap. The
afternoon sun streamed in through the open window and suddenly she saw,
as for the first time, how large and brown and strong his hands were
and how thickly the black hairs grew along the backs of them.
Involuntarily, she recoiled from them. They seemed so predatory, so
ruthless and yet, twined in her skirt, so broken, so helpless.

Could it be possible that he had heard and believed the preposterous
lie about Scarlett and Ashley and become jealous? True, he had left
town immediately after the scandal broke but— No, it couldn't be that.
Captain Butler was always going off abruptly on journeys. He couldn't
have believed the gossip. He was too sensible. If that had been the
cause of the trouble, wouldn't he have tried to shoot Ashley? Or at
least demanded an explanation?

No, it couldn't be that. It was only that he was drunk and sick from
strain and his mind was running wild, like a man delirious, babbling
wild fantasies. Men couldn't stand strains as well as women. Something
had upset him, perhaps he had had a small quarrel with Scarlett and
magnified it. Perhaps some of the awful things he said were true. But
all of them could not be true. Oh, not that last, certainly! No man
could say such a thing to a woman he loved as passionately as this man
loved Scarlett. Melanie had never seen evil, never seen cruelty, and
now that she looked on them for the first time she found them too
inconceivable to believe. He was drunk and sick. And sick children must
be humored.

"There! There!" she said crooningly. "Hush, now. I understand."

He raised his head violently and looked up at her with bloodshot
eyes, fiercely throwing off her hands.

"No, by God, you don't understand! You can't understand! You're—
you're too good to understand. You don't believe me but it's all true
and I'm a dog. Do you know why I did it? I was mad, crazy with
jealousy. She never cared for me and I thought I could make her care.
But she never cared. She doesn't love me. She never has. She
loves—"

His passionate, drunken gaze met hers and he stopped, mouth open, as
though for the first time he realized to whom he was speaking. Her face
was white and strained but her eyes were steady and sweet and full of
pity and unbelief. There was a luminous serenity in them and the
innocence in the soft brown depths struck him like a blow in the face,
clearing some of the alcohol out of his brain, halting his mad,
careering words in mid-flight. He trailed off into a mumble, his eyes
dropping away from hers, his lids batting rapidly as he fought back to
sanity.

"I'm a cad," he muttered, dropping his head tiredly back into her
lap. "But not that big a cad. And if I did tell you, you wouldn't
believe me, would you? You're too good to believe me. I never before
knew anybody who was really good. You wouldn't believe me, would
you?"

"No, I wouldn't believe you," said Melanie soothingly, beginning to
stroke his hair again. "She's going to get well. There, Captain Butler!
Don't cry! She's going to get well."

CHAPTER LVII

It was a pale, thin woman that Rhett put on the Jonesboro train a
month later. Wade and Ella, who were to make the trip with her, were
silent and uneasy at their mother's still, white face. They clung close
to Prissy, for even to their childish minds there was something
frightening in the cold, impersonal atmosphere between their mother and
their stepfather.

Weak as she was, Scarlett was going home to Tara. She felt that she
would stifle if she stayed in Atlanta another day, with her tired mind
forcing itself round and round the deeply worn circle of futile
thoughts about the mess she was in. She was sick in body and weary in
mind and she was standing like a lost child in a nightmare country in
which there was no familiar landmark to guide her.

As she had once fled Atlanta before an invading army, so she was
fleeing it again, pressing her worries into the back of her mind with
her old defense against the world: "I won't think of it now. I can't
stand it if I do. I'll think of it tomorrow at Tara. Tomorrow's another
day." It seemed that if she could only get back to the stillness and
the green cotton fields of home, all her troubles would fall away and
she would somehow be able to mold her shattered thoughts into something
she could live by.

Rhett watched the train until it was out of sight and on his face
there was a look of speculative bitterness that was not pleasant. He
sighed, dismissed the carriage and mounting his horse, rode down Ivy
Street toward Melanie's house.

It was a warm morning and Melanie sat on the vine-shaded porch, her
mending basket piled high with socks. Confusion and dismay filled her
when she saw Rhett alight from his horse and toss the reins over the
arm of the cast-iron negro boy who stood at the sidewalk. She had not
seen him alone since that too dreadful day when Scarlett had been so
ill and he had been so—well—so drunk. Melanie hated even to think the
word. She had spoken to him only casually during Scarlett's
convalescence and, on those occasions, she had found it difficult to
meet his eyes. However, he had been his usual bland self at those
times, and never by look or word showed

=== SCENE 116 ===
" she thought. "He does remember! And he knows how upset I
am!"

She looked up at him, imploringly, and suddenly her embarrassment
and confusion faded. His eyes were so quiet, so kind, so understanding
that she wondered how she could ever have been silly enough to be
flurried. His face looked tired and, she thought with surprise, more
than a little sad. How could she have even thought he'd be ill bred
enough to bring up subjects both would rather forget?

"Poor thing, he's been so worried about Scarlett," she thought, and
managing a smile, she said: "Do sit down, Captain Butler."

He sat down heavily and watched her as she picked up her
darning.

"Miss Melly, I've come to ask a very great favor of you and," he
smiled and his mouth twisted down, "to enlist your aid in a deception
from which I know you will shrink."

"A—deception?"

"Yes. Really, I've come to talk business to you."

"Oh, dear. Then it's Mr. Wilkes you'd better see. I'm such a goose
about business. I'm not smart like Scarlett."

"I'm afraid Scarlett is too smart for her own good," he said, "and
that is exactly what I want to talk to you about. You know how— ill
she's been. When she gets back from Tara she will start again hammer
and tongs with the store and those mills which I wish devoutly would
explode some night. I fear for her health, Miss Melly."

"Yes, she does far too much. You must make her stop and take care of
herself."

He laughed.

"You know how headstrong she is. I never even try to argue with her.
She's just like a willful child. She won't let me help her— she won't
let anyone help her. I've tried to get her to sell her share in the
mills but she won't. And now, Miss Melly, I come to the business
matter. I know Scarlett would sell the remainder of her interest in the
mills to Mr. Wilkes but to no one else, and I want Mr. Wilkes to buy
her out."

"Oh, dear me! That would be nice but—" Melanie stopped and bit her
lip. She could not mention money matters to an outsider. Somehow,
despite what he made from the mill, she and Ashley never seemed to have
enough money. It worried her that they saved so little. She did not
know where the money went. Ashley gave her enough to run the house on,
but when it came to extra expenses they were often pinched. Of course,
her doctor's bills were so much, and then the books and furniture Ashley
ordered from New York did run into money. And they had fed and clothed
any number of waifs who slept in their cellar. And Ashley never felt
like refusing a loan to any man who'd been in the Confederate Army.
And—

"Miss Melly, I want to lend you the money," said Rhett.

"That's so kind of you, but we might never repay it."

"I don't want it repaid. Don't be angry with me, Miss Melly! Please
hear me through. It will repay me enough to know that Scarlett will not
be exhausting herself driving miles to the mills every day. The store
will be enough to keep her busy and happy...Don't you see?"

"Well—yes—" said Melanie uncertainly.

"You want your boy to have a pony don't you? And want him to go to
the university and to Harvard and to Europe on a Grand Tour?"

"Oh, of course," cried Melanie, her face lighting up, as always, at
the mention of Beau. "I want him to have everything but—well, everyone
is so poor these days that—"

"Mr. Wilkes could make a pile of money out of the mills some day,"
said Rhett. "And I'd like to see Beau have all the advantages he
deserves."

"Oh, Captain Butler, what a crafty wretch you are!" she cried,
smiling. "Appealing to a mother's pride! I can read you like a
book."

"I hope not," said Rhett, and for the first time there was a gleam
in his eye. "Now will you let me lend you the money?"

"But where does the deception come in?"

"We must be conspirators and deceive both Scarlett and Mr.
Wilkes."

"Oh, dear! I couldn't!"

"If Scarlett knew I had plotted behind her back, even for her own
good—well, you know her temper! And I'm afraid Mr. Wilkes would refuse
any loan I offered him. So neither of them must know where the money
comes from."

"Oh, but I'm sure Mr. Wilkes wouldn't refuse, if he understood the
matter. He is so fond of Scarlett."

"Yes, I'm sure he is," said Rhett smoothly. "But just the same he
would refuse. You know how proud all the Wilkes are."

"Oh, dear!" cried Melanie miserably, "I wish— Really, Captain
Butler, I couldn't deceive my husband."

"Not even to help Scarlett?" Rhett looked very hurt. "And she is so
fond of you!"

Tears trembled on Melanie's eyelids.

"You know I'd do anything in the world for her. I can never, never
half repay her for what she's done for me. You know."

"Yes," he said shortly, "I know what she's done for you. Couldn't
you tell Mr. Wilkes that the money was left you in the will of some
relative?"

"Oh, Captain Butler, I haven't a relative with a penny to bless
him!"

"Then, if I sent the money through the mail to Mr. Wilkes without
his knowing who sent it, would you see that it was used to buy the
mills and not—well, given away to destitute ex-Confederates?"

At first she looked hurt at his last words, as though they implied
criticism of Ashley, but he smiled so understandingly she smiled
back.

"Of course I will."

"So it's settled? It's to be our secret?"

"But I have never kept anything secret from my husband!"

"I'm sure of that, Miss Melly."

As she looked at him she thought how right she had always been about
him and how wrong so many other people were. People had said he was
brutal and sneering and bad mannered and even dishonest. Though many of
the nicest people were now admitting they had been wrong. Well! She had
known from the very beginning that he was a fine man. She had never
received from him anything but the kindest treatment, thoughtfulness,
utter respect and what understanding! And then, how he loved Scarlett!
How sweet of him to take this roundabout way of sparing Scarlett one of
the loads she carried!

In an impulsive rush of feeling, she said: "Scarlett's lucky to have
a husband who's so nice to her!"

"You think so? I'm afraid she wouldn't agree with you, if she could
hear you. Besides, I want to be nice to you too, Miss Melly. I'm giving
you more than I'm giving Scarlett."

"Me!" she questioned, puzzled. "Oh, you mean for Beau."

He picked up his hat and rose. He stood for a moment looking down at
the plain, heart-shaped face with its long widow's peak and serious
dark eyes. Such an unworldly face, a face with no defenses against
life.

"No, not Beau. I'm trying to give you something more than Beau, if
you can imagine that."

"No, I can't," she said, bewildered again. "There's nothing in the
world more precious to me than Beau except Ash—except Mr. Wilkes."

Rhett said nothing and looked down at her, his dark face still.

"You're mighty nice to want to do things for me, Captain Butler, but
really, I'm so lucky. I have everything in the world any woman could
want."

"That's fine," said Rhett, suddenly grim. "And I intend to see that
you keep them."


When Scarlett came back from Tara, the unhealthy pallor had gone
from her face and her cheeks were rounded and faintly pink. Her green
eyes were alert and sparkling again, and she laughed aloud for the
first time in weeks when Rhett and Bonnie met her and Wade and Ella at
the depot—laughed in annoyance and amusement. Rhett had two straggling
turkey feathers in the brim of his hat and Bonnie, dressed in a sadly
torn dress that was her Sunday frock, had diagonal lines of indigo blue
on her cheeks and a peacock feather half as long as she was in her
curls. Evidently a game of Indian had been in progress when the time
came to meet the train and it was obvious from the look of quizzical
helplessness on Rhett's face and the lowering indignation of Mammy that
Bonnie had refused to have her toilet remedied, even to meet her
mother.

Scarlett said: "What a ragamuffin!" as she kissed the child and
turned a cheek for Rhett's lips. There were crowds of people in the
depot or she would never have invited this caress. She could not help
noticing, for all her embarrassment at Bonnie's appearance, that
everyone in the crowd was smiling at the figure father and daughter
cut, smiling not in derision but in genuine amusement and kindness.
Everyone knew that Scarlett's youngest had her father under her thumb
and Atlanta was amused and approving. Rhett's great love for his child
had gone far toward reinstating him in public opinion.

On the way home, Scarlett was full of County news. The hot, dry
weather was making the cotton grow so fast you could almost hear it but
Will said cotton prices were going to be low this fall. Suellen was
going to have another baby—she spelled this out so the children would
not comprehend—and Ella had shown unwonted spirit in biting Suellen's
oldest girl. Though, observed Scarlett, it was no more than little
Susie deserved, she being her mother all over again. But Suellen had
become infuriated and they had had an invigorating quarrel that was
just like old times. Wade had killed a water moccasin, all by himself.
'Randa and Camilla Tarleton were teaching school and wasn't that a
joke? Not a one of the Tarletons had ever been able to spell cat! Betsy
Tarleton had married a fat one-armed man from Lovejoy and they and
Hetty and Jim Tarleton were raising a good cotton crop at Fairhill.
Mrs. Tarleton had a brood mare and a colt and was as happy as though
she had a million dollars. And there were negroes living in the old
Calvert house! Swarms of them and they actually owned it! They'd bought
it in at the sheriff's sale. The place was dilapidated and it made you
cry to look at it. No one knew where Cathleen and her no-good husband
had gone. And Alex was to marry Sally, his brother's widow! Imagine
that, after them living in the same house for so many years! Everybody
said it was a marriage of convenience because people were beginning to
gossip about them living there alone, since both Old Miss and Young
Miss had died. And it had about broken Dimity Munroe's heart. But it
served her right. If she'd had any gumption she'd have caught her
another man long ago, instead of waiting for Alex to get money enough
to marry her.

Scarlett chattered on cheerfully but there were many things about
the County which she suppressed, things that hurt to think about. She
had driven over the County with Will, trying not to remember when these
thousands of fertile acres had stood green with cotton. Now, plantation
after plantation was going back to the forest, and dismal fields of
broomsedge, scrub oak and runty pines had grown stealthily about silent
ruins and over old cotton fields. Only one acre was being farmed now
where once a hundred had been under the plow. It was like moving
through a dead land.

"This section won't come back for fifty years—if it ever comes
back," Will had said. "Tara's the best farm in the County, thanks to
you and me, Scarlett, but it's a farm, a two-mule farm, not a
plantation. And the Fontaine place, it comes next to Tara and then the
Tarletons. They ain't makin' much money but they're gettin' along and
they got gumption. But most of the rest of the folks, the rest of the
farms—"

No, Scarlett did not like to remember the way the deserted County
looked. It seemed even sadder, in retrospect, beside the bustle and
prosperity of Atlanta.

"Has anything happened here?" she asked when they were finally home
and were seated on the front porch. She had talked rapidly and
continuously all the way home, fearing that a silence would fall. She
had not had a word alone with Rhett since that day when she fell down
the steps and she was none too anxious to be alone with him now. She
did not know how he felt toward her. He had been kindness itself during
her miserable convalescence, but it was the kindness of an impersonal
stranger. He had anticipated her wants, kept the children from
bothering her and supervised the store and the mills. But he had never
said: "I'm sorry." Well, perhaps he wasn't sorry. Perhaps he still
thought that child that was never born was not his child. How could she
tell what went on in the mind behind the bland dark face? But he had
showed a disposition to be courteous, for the first time in their
married life, and a desire to let life go on as though there had never
been anything unpleasant between them—as though, thought Scarlett,
cheerlessly, as though there had never been anything at all between
them. Well, if that was what he wanted, she could act her part too.

"Is everything all right?" she repeated. "Did you get the new
shingles for the store? Did you swap the mules? For Heaven's sake,
Rhett, take those feathers out of your hat. You look a fool and you'll
be likely to wear them downtown without remembering to take them
out."

"No," said Bonnie, picking up her father's hat, defensively.

"Everything has gone very well here," replied Rhett. "Bonnie and I
have had a nice time and I don't believe her hair has been combed since
you left. Don't suck the feathers, darling, they may be nasty. Yes, the
shingles are fixed and I got a good trade on the mules. No, there's
really no news. Everything has been quite dull."

Then, as an afterthought, he added: "The honorable Ashley was over
here last night. He wanted to know if I thought you would sell him your
mill and the part interest you have in his."

Scarlett, who had been rocking and fanning herself with a turkey
tail fan, stopped abruptly.

"Sell? Where on earth did Ashley get the money? You know they never
have a cent. Melanie spends it as fast as he makes it."

Rhett shrugged. "I always thought her a frugal little person, but
then I'm not as well informed about the intimate details of the Wilkes
family as you seem to be."

That jab seemed in something of Rhett's old style and Scarlett grew
annoyed.

"Run away, dear," she said to Bonnie. "Mother wants to talk to
Father."

"No," said Bonnie positively and climbed upon Rhett's lap.

Scarlett frowned at her child and Bonnie scowled back in so complete
a resemblance to Gerald O'Hara that Scarlett almost laughed.

"Let her stay," said Rhett comfortably. "As to where he got the
money, it seems it was sent him by someone he nursed through a case of
smallpox at Rock Island. It renews my faith in human nature to know
that gratitude still exists."

"Who was it? Anyone we know?"

"The letter was unsigned and came from Washington. Ashley was at a
loss to know who could have sent it. But then, one of Ashley's
unselfish temperament goes about the world doing so many good deeds
that you can't expect him to remember all of them."

Had she not been so surprised at Ashley's windfall, Scarlett would
have taken up this gauntlet, although while at Tara she had decided
that never again would she permit herself to be involved in any quarrel
with Rhett about Ashley. The ground on which she stood in this matter
was entirely too uncertain and, until she knew exactly where she stood
with both men, she did not care to be drawn out.

"He wants to buy me out?"

"Yes. But of course, I told him you wouldn't sell."

"I wish you'd let me mind my own business."

"Well, you know you wouldn't part with the mills. I told him that he
knew as well as I did that you couldn't bear not to have your finger in
everybody's pie, and if you sold out to him, then you wouldn't be able
to tell him how to mind his own business."

"You dared say that to him about me?"

"Why not? It's true, isn't it? I believe he heartily agreed with me
but, of course, he was too much of a gentleman to come right out and
say so."

"It's a lie! I will sell them to him!" cried Scarlett angrily.

Until that moment, she had had no idea of parting with the mills.
She had several reasons for wanting to keep them and their monetary
value was the least reason. She could have sold them for large sums any
time in the last few years, but she had refused all offers. The mills
were the tangible evidence of what she had done, unaided and against
great odds, and she was proud of them and of herself. Most of all, she
did not want to sell them because they were the only path that lay open
to Ashley. If the mills went from her control it would mean that she
would seldom see Ashley and probably never see him alone. And she had
to see him alone. She could not go on this way any longer, wondering
what his feelings toward her were now, wondering if all his love had
died in shame since the dreadful night of Melanie's party. In the
course of business she could find many opportune times for
conversations without it appearing to anyone that she was seeking him
out. And, given time, she knew she could gain back whatever ground she
had lost in his heart. But if she sold the mills—

No, she did not want to sell but, goaded by the thought that Rhett
had exposed her to Ashley in so truthful and so unflattering a light,
she had made up her mind instantly. Ashley should have the mills and at
a price so low he could not help realizing how generous she was.

"I will sell!" she cried furiously. "Now, what do you think of
that?"

There was the faintest gleam of triumph in Rhett's eyes as he bent
to tie Bonnie's shoe string.

"I think you'll regret it," he said.

Already she was regretting the hasty words. Had they been spoken to
anyone save Rhett she would have shamelessly retracted them. Why had
she burst out like that? She looked at Rhett with an angry frown and
saw that he was watching her with his old keen, cat-at-a- mouse-hole
look. When he saw her frown, he laughed suddenly, his white teeth
flashing. Scarlett had an uncertain feeling that he had jockeyed her
into this position.

"Did you have anything to do with this?" she snapped.

"I?" His brows went up in mock surprise. "You should know me better.
I never go about the world doing good deeds if I can avoid it."


That night she sold the mills and all her interest in them to
Ashley. She did not lose thereby for Ashley refused to take advantage
of her first low offer and met the highest bid that she had ever had
for them. When she had signed the papers and the mills were irrevocably
gone and Melanie was passing small glasses of wine to Ashley and Rhett
to celebrate the transaction, Scarlett felt bereft, as though she had
sold one of her children.

The mills had been her darlings, her pride, the fruit of her small
grasping hands. She had started with one little mill in those black
days when Atlanta was barely struggling up from ruin and ashes and want
was staring her in the face. She had fought and schemed and nursed them
through the dark times when Yankee confiscation loomed, when money was
tight and smart men going to the wall. And now when Atlanta was
covering its scars and buildings were going up everywhere and newcomers
flocking to the town every day, she had two fine mills, two lumber
yards, a dozen mule teams and convict labor to operate the business at
low cost. Bidding farewell to them was like closing a door forever on a
part of her life, a bitter, harsh part but one which she recalled with
a nostalgic satisfaction.

She had built up this business and now she had sold it and she was
oppressed with the certainty that, without her at the helm, Ashley
would lose it all—everything that she had worked to build. Ashley
trusted everyone and still hardly knew a two-by-four from a six-by-
eight. And now she would never be able to give him the benefit of her
advice—all because Rhett had told him that she liked to boss
everything.

"Oh, damn Rhett!" she thought and as she watched him the conviction
grew that he was at the bottom of all this. Just how and why she did
not know. He was talking to Ashley and his words brought her up
sharply.

"I suppose you'll turn the convicts back right away," he said.

Turn the convicts back? Why should there be any idea of turning them
back? Rhett knew perfectly well that the large profits from the mills
grew out of the cheap convict labor. And why did Rhett speak with such
certainty about what Ashley's future actions would be? What did he know
of him?

"Yes, they'll go back immediately," replied Ashley and he avoided
Scarlett's dumbfounded gaze.

"Have you lost your mind?" she cried. "You'll lose all the money on
the lease and what kind of labor can you get, anyway?"

"I'll use free darkies," said Ashley.

"Free darkies! Fiddle-dee-dee! You know what their wages will cost
and besides you'll have the Yankees on your neck every minute to see if
you're giving them chicken three times a day and tucking them to sleep
under eiderdown quilts. And if you give a lazy darky a couple of licks
to speed him up, you'll hear the Yankees scream from here to Dalton and
you'll end up in jail. Why, convicts are the only—"

Melanie looked down into her lap at her twisted hands. Ashley looked
unhappy but obdurate. For a moment he was silent. Then his gaze crossed
Rhett's and it was as if he found understanding and encouragement in
Rhett's eyes—a glance that was not lost on Scarlett.

"I won't work convicts, Scarlett," he said quietly.

"Well, sir!" her breath was taken away. "And why not? Are you afraid
people will talk about you like they do about me?"

Ashley raised his head.

"I'm not afraid of what people say as long as I'm right. And I have
never felt that convict labor was right."

"But why—"

"I can't make money from the enforced labor and misery of
others."

"But you owned slaves!"

"They weren't miserable. And besides, I'd have freed them all when
Father died if the war hadn't already freed them. But this is
different, Scarlett. The system is open to too many abuses. Perhaps you
don't know it but I do. I know very well that Johnnie Gallegher has
killed at least one man at his camp. Maybe more—who cares about one
convict, more or less? He said the man was killed trying to escape, but
that's not what I've heard elsewhere. And I know he works men who are
too sick to work. Call it superstition, but I do not believe that
happiness can come from money made from the sufferings of others."

"God's nightgown! You mean—goodness, Ashley, you didn't swallow all
the Reverend Wallace's bellowings about tainted money?"

"I didn't have to swallow it. I believed it long before he preached
on it."

"Then, you must think all my money is tainted," cried Scarlett
beginning to be angry. "Because I worked convicts and own saloon
property and—" She stopped short. Both the Wilkes looked embarrassed
and Rhett was grinning broadly. Damn him, thought Scarlett, vehemently.
He's thinking that I'm sticking my finger in other people's pies again
and so is Ashley. I'd like to crack their heads together! She swallowed
her wrath and tried to assume an aloof air of dignity but with little
success.

"Of course, it's immaterial to me," she said.

"Scarlett, don't think I'm criticizing you! I'm not. It's just that
we look at things in different ways and what is good for you might not
be good for me."

She suddenly wished that they were alone, wished ardently that Rhett
and Melanie were at the end of the earth, so she could cry out: "But I
want to look at things the way you look at them! Tell me just what you
mean, so I can understand and be like you!"

But with Melanie present, trembling with the distress of the scene,
and Rhett lounging, grinning at her, she could only say with as much
coolness and offended virtue as she could muster: "I'm sure it's your
own business, Ashley, and far be it from me to tell you how to run it.
But, I must say, I do not understand your attitude or your
remarks."

Oh, if they were only alone, so she would not be forced to say these
cool things to him, these words that were making him unhappy!

"I've offended you, Scarlett, and I did not mean to. You must
believe me and forgive me. There is nothing enigmatic in what I said.
It is only that I believe that money which comes in certain ways seldom
brings happiness."

"But you're wrong!" she cried, unable to restrain herself any
longer. "Look at me! You know how my money came. You know how things
were before I made my money! You remember that winter at Tara when it
was so cold and we were cutting up the carpets for shoes and there
wasn't enough to eat and we used to wonder how we were going to give
Beau and Wade an education. You remem—"

"I remember," said Ashley tiredly, "but I'd rather forget."

"Well, you can't say any of us were happy then, can you? And look at
us now! You've a nice home and a good future. And has anyone a prettier
house than mine or nicer clothes or finer horses? Nobody sets as fine a
table as me or gives nicer receptions and my children have everything
they want. Well, how did I get the money to make it possible? Off
trees? No, sir! Convicts and saloon rentals and—"

"And don't forget murdering that Yankee," said Rhett softly. "He
really gave you your start."

Scarlett swung on him, furious words on her lips.

"And the money has made you very, very happy, hasn't it, darling?"
he asked, poisonously sweet.

Scarlett stopped short, her mouth open, and her eyes went swiftly to
the eyes of the other three. Melanie was almost crying with
embarrassment, Ashley was suddenly bleak and withdrawn and Rhett was
watching her over his cigar with impersonal amusement. She started to
cry out: "But of course, it's made me happy!"

But somehow, she could not speak.

CHAPTER LVIII

In the time that followed her illness Scarlett noticed a change in
Rhett and she was not altogether certain that she liked it. He was
sober and quiet and preoccupied. He was at home more often for supper
now and he was kinder to the servants and more affectionate to Wade and
Ella. He never referred to anything in their past, pleasant or
otherwise, and silently seemed to dare her to bring up such subjects.
Scarlett held her peace, for it was easier to let well enough alone,
and life went on smoothly enough, on the surface. His impersonal
courtesy toward her that had begun during her convalescence continued
and he did not fling softly drawled barbs at her or sting her with
sarcasm. She realized now that though he had infuriated her with his
malicious comments and roused her to heated rejoinders, he had done it
because he cared what she did and said. Now she wondered if he cared
about anything she did. He was polite and disinterested and she missed
his interest, perverse though it had been, missed the old days of
bickering and retort.

He was pleasant to her now, almost as though she were a stranger;
but, as his eyes had once followed her, they now followed Bonnie. It
was as though the swift flood of his life had been diverted into one
narrow channel. Sometimes Scarlett thought that if Rhett had given her
one-half the attention and tenderness he lavished on Bonnie, life would
have been different. Sometimes it was hard to smile when people said:
"How Captain Butler idolizes that child!" But, if she did not smile,
people would think it strange and Scarlett hated to acknowledge, even
to herself, that she was jealous of a little girl, especially when that
little girl was her favorite child. Scarlett always wanted to be first
in the hearts of those around her and it was obvious now that Rhett and
Bonnie would always be first with each other.

Rhett was out late many nights but he came home sober on these
nights. Often she heard him whistling softly to himself as he went down
the hall past her closed door. Sometimes men came home with him in the
late hours and sat talking in the dining room around the brandy
decanter. They were not the same men with whom he had drunk the first
year they were married. No rich Carpetbaggers, no Scallawags, no
Republicans came to the house now at his invitation. Scarlett, creeping
on tiptoe to the banister of the upstairs hall, listened and, to her
amazement, frequently heard the voices of Rene Picard, Hugh Elsing, the
Simmons boys and Andy Bonnell. And always Grandpa Merriwether and Uncle
Henry were there. Once, to her astonishment, she heard the tones of Dr.
Meade. And these men had once thought hanging too good for Rhett!

This group was always linked in her mind with Frank's death, and the
late hours Rhett kept these days reminded her still more of the times
preceding the Klan foray when Frank lost his life. She remembered with
dread Rhett's remark that he would even join their damned Klan to be
respectable, though he hoped God would not lay so heavy a penance on
his shoulders. Suppose Rhett, like Frank—

One night when he was out later than usual she could stand the
strain no longer. When she heard the rasp of his key in the lock, she
threw on a wrapper and, going into the gas lit upper hall, met him at
the top of the stairs. His expression, absent, thoughtful, changed to
surprise when he saw her standing there.

"Rhett, I've got to know! I've got to know if you—if it's the
Klan—is that why you stay out so late? Do you belong—"

In the flaring gas light he looked at her incuriously and then he
smiled.

"You are way behind the times," he said. "There is no Klan in
Atlanta now. Probably not in Georgia. You've been listening to the Klan
outrage stories of your Scallawag and Carpetbagger friends."

"No Klan? Are you lying to try to soothe me?"

"My dear, when did I ever try to soothe you? No, there is no Klan
now. We decided that it did more harm than good because it just kept
the Yankees stirred up and furnished more grist for the slander mill of
his excellency, Governor Bullock. He knows he can stay in power just so
long as he can convince the Federal government and the Yankee
newspapers that Georgia is seething with rebellion and there's a
Klansman hiding behind every bush. To keep in power he's been
desperately manufacturing Klan outrage stories where none exist,
telling of loyal Republicans being hung up by the thumbs and honest
darkies lynched for rape. But he's shooting at a nonexistent target and
he knows it. Thank you for your apprehensions, but there hasn't been an
active Klan since shortly after I stopped being a Scallawag and became
an humble Democrat."

Most of what he said about Governor Bullock went in one ear and out
the other for her mind was mainly occupied with relief that there was
no Klan any longer. Rhett would not be killed as Frank was killed; she
wouldn't lose her store or his money. But one word of his conversation
swam to the top of her mind. He had said "we," linking himself
naturally with those he had once called the "Old Guard."

"Rhett," she asked suddenly, "did you have anything to do with the
breaking up of the Klan?"

He gave her a long look and his eyes began to dance.

"My love, I did. Ashley Wilkes and I are mainly responsible."

"Ashley—and you?"

"Yes, platitudinously but truly, politics make strange bedfellows.
Neither Ashley nor I cared much for each other as bedfellows but—
Ashley never believed in the Klan because he's against violence of any
sort. And I never believed in it because it's damned foolishness an

=== SCENE 117 ===
our beloved state from the hands
of her ravishers! My advice was good advice and they took it. My advice
in other political matters is equally good. We have a Democratic
majority in the legislature now, haven't we? And soon, my love, we will
have some of our good Republican friends behind the bars. They are a
bit too rapacious these days, a bit too open."

"You'd help put them in jail? Why, they were your friends! They let
you in on that railroad-bond business that you made thousands out
of!"

Rhett grinned suddenly, his old mocking grin.

"Oh, I bear them no ill will. But I'm on the other side now and if I
can assist in any way in putting them where they belong, I'll do it.
And how that will redound to my credit! I know just enough about the
inside of some of these deals to be very valuable when the legislature
starts digging into them—and that won't be far off, from the way
things look now. They're going to investigate the governor, too, and
they'll put him in jail if they can. Better tell your good friends the
Gelerts and the Hundons to be ready to leave town on a minute's notice,
because if they can nab the governor, they'll nab them too."

For too many years Scarlett had seen the Republicans, backed up by
the force of the Yankee Army, in power in Georgia to believe Rhett's
light words. The governor was too strongly entrenched for any
legislature to do anything to him, much less put him in jail.

"How you do run on," she observed.

"If he isn't put in jail, at least he won't be reelected. We're
going to have a Democratic governor next time, for a change."

"And I suppose you'll have something to do with it?" she questioned
sarcastically.

"My pet, I will. I am having something to do with it now. That's why
I stay out so late at nights. I'm working harder than I ever worked
with a shovel in the gold rush, trying to help get the election
organized. And—I know this will hurt you, Mrs. Butler, but I am
contributing plenty of money to the organization, too. Do you remember
telling me, years ago, in Frank's store, that it was dishonest for me
to keep the Confederate gold? At last I've come to agree with you and
the Confederate gold is being spent to get the Confederates back into
power."

"You're pouring money down a rat hole!"

"What! You call the Democratic party a rat hole?" His eyes mocked
her and then were quiet, expressionless. "It doesn't matter a damn to
me who wins this election. What does matter is that everyone knows I've
worked for it and that I've spent money on it. And that'll be
remembered in Bonnie's favor in years to come."

"I was almost afraid from your pious talk that you'd had a change of
heart, but I see you've got no more sincerity about the Democrats than
about anything else."

"Not a change of heart at all. Merely a change of hide. You might
possibly sponge the spots off a leopard but he'd remain a leopard, just
the same."

Bonnie, awakened by the sound of voices in the hall, called sleepily
but imperiously: "Daddy!" and Rhett started past Scarlett.

"Rhett, wait a minute. There's something else I want to tell you.
You must stop taking Bonnie around with you in the afternoons to
political meetings. It just doesn't look well. The idea of a little
girl at such places! And it makes you look so silly. I never dreamed
that you took her until Uncle Henry mentioned it, as though he thought
I knew and—"

He swung round on her and his face was hard.

"How can you read wrong in a little girl sitting on her father's lap
while he talks to friends? You may think it looks silly but it isn't
silly. People will remember for years that Bonnie sat on my lap while I
helped run the Republicans out of this state. People will remember for
years—" The hardness went out of his face and a malicious light danced
in his eyes. "Did you know that when people ask her who she loves best,
she says 'Daddy and the Demiquats,' and who she hates most, she says:
'The Scallywags.' People, thank God, remember things like that."

Scarlett's voice rose furiously. "And I suppose you tell her I'm a
Scallawag!"

"Daddy!" said the small voice, indignant now, and Rhett, still
laughing, went down the hall to his daughter.


That October Governor Bullock resigned his office and fled from
Georgia. Misuse of public funds, waste and corruption had reached such
proportions during his administration that the edifice was toppling of
its own weight. Even his own party was split, so great had public
indignation become. The Democrats had a majority in the legislature
now, and that meant just one thing. Knowing that he was going to be
investigated and fearing impeac

=== SCENE 118 ===
e Gelerts and Hundons, evidently
apprised of Bullock's departure before his resignation became public,
left town abruptly, disappearing into that oblivion from which they had
come. The other Carpetbaggers and Scallawags who remained were
uncertain, frightened, and they hovered together for comfort, wondering
what the legislative investigation would bring to light concerning
their own private affairs. They were not insolent now. They were
stunned, bewildered, afraid. And the ladies who called on Scarlett said
over and over:

"But who would have thought it would turn out this way? We thought
the governor was too powerful. We thought he was here to stay. We
thought—"

Scarlett was equally bewildered by the turn of events, despite
Rhett's warning as to the direction it would take. It was not that she
was sorry Bullock had gone and the Democrats were back again. Though no
one would have believed it she, too, felt a grim happiness that the
Yankee rule was at last thrown off. She remembered all too vividly her
struggles during those first days of Reconstruction, her fears that the
soldiers and the Carpetbaggers would confiscate her money and her
property. She remembered her helplessness and her panic at her
helplessness and her hatred of the Yankees who had imposed this galling
system upon the South. And she had never stopped hating them. But, in
trying to make the best of things, in trying to obtain complete
security, she had gone with the conquerors. No matter how much she
disliked them, she had surrounded herself with them, cut herself off
from her old friends and her old ways of living. And now the power of
the conquerors was at an end. She had gambled on the continuance of the
Bullock regime and she had lost.

As she looked about her, that Christmas of 1871, the happiest
Christmas the state had known in over ten years, she was disquieted.
She could not help seeing that Rhett, once the most execrated man in
Atlanta, was now one of the most popular, for he had humbly recanted
his Republican heresies and given his time and money and labor and
thought to helping Georgia fight her way back. When he rode down the
streets, smiling, tipping his hat, the small blue bundle that was
Bonnie perched before him on his saddle, everyone smiled back, spoke
with enthusiasm and looked with affection on the little girl. Whereas,
she, Scarlett—

CHAPTER LIX

There was no doubt in anyone's mind that Bonnie Butler was running
wild and needed a firm hand but she was so general a favorite that no
one had the heart to attempt the necessary firmness. She had first
gotten out of control the months when she traveled with her father.
When she had been with Rhett in New Orleans and Charleston she had been
permitted to sit up as late as she pleased and had gone to sleep in his
arms in theaters, restaurants and at card tables. Thereafter, nothing
short of force would make her go to bed at the same time as the
obedient Ella. While she had been away with him, Rhett had let her wear
any dress she chose and, since that time, she had gone into tantrums
when Mammy tried to dress her in dimity frocks and pinafores instead of
blue taffeta and lace collars.

There seemed no way to regain the ground which had been lost when
the child was away from home and later when Scarlett had been ill and
at Tara. As Bonnie grew older Scarlett tried to discipline her, tried
to keep her from becoming too headstrong and spoiled, but with little
success. Rhett always sided with the child, no matter how foolish her
desires or how outrageous her behavior. He encouraged her to talk and
treated her as an adult, listening to her opinions with apparent
seriousness and pretending to be guided by them. As a result, Bonnie
interrupted her elders whenever she pleased and contradicted her father
and put him in his place. He only laughed and would not permit Scarlett
even to slap the little girl's hand by way of reprimand.

"If she wasn't such a sweet, darling thing, she'd be impossible,"
thought Scarlett ruefully, realizing that she had a child with a will
equal to her own. "She adores Rhett and he could make her behave better
if he wanted to."

But Rhett showed no inclination to make Bonnie behave. Whatever she
did was right and if she wanted the moon she could have it, if he could
reach it for her. His pride in her beauty, her curls, her dimples, her
graceful little gestures was boundless. He loved her pertness, her high
spirits and the quaint sweet manner she had of showing her love for
him. For all her spoiled and willful ways she was such a lovable child
that he lacked the heart to try to curb her. He was her god, the center
of her small world, and that was too precious for him to risk losing by
reprimands.

She clung to him like a shadow. She woke him earlier than he cared
to wake, sat beside him at the table, eating alternately from his plate
and her own, rode in front of him on his horse and permitted no one but
Rhett to undress her and put her to sleep in the small bed beside
his.

It amused and touched Scarlett to see the iron hand with which her
small child ruled her father. Who would have thought that Rhett, of all
people, would take fatherhood so seriously? But sometimes a dart of
jealousy went through Scarlett because Bonnie, at the age of four,
understood Rhett better than she had ever understood him and could
manage him better than she had ever managed him.

When Bonnie was four years old, Mammy began to grumble about the
impropriety of a girl child riding "a-straddle in front of her pa wid
her dress flyin' up." Rhett lent an attentive ear to this remark, as he
did to all Mammy's remarks about the proper raising of little girls.
The result was a small brown and white Shetland pony with a long silky
mane and tail and a tiny sidesaddle with silver trimmings. Ostensibly
the pony was for all three children and Rhett bought a saddle for Wade
too. But Wade infinitely preferred his St. Bernard dog and Ella was
afraid of all animals. So the pony became Bonnie's own and was named
"Mr. Butler." The only flaw in Bonnie's possessive joy was that she
could not still ride astride like her father, but after he had
explained how much more difficult it was to ride on the sidesaddle, she
was content and learned rapidly. Rhett's pride in her good seat and her
good hands was enormous.

"Wait till she's old enough to hunt," he boasted. "There'll be no
one like her on any field. I'll take her to Virginia then. That's where
the real hunting is. And Kentucky where they appreciate good
riders."

When it came to making her riding habit, as usual she had her choice
of colors and as usual chose blue.

"But, my darling! Not that blue velvet! The blue velvet is for a
party dress for me," laughed Scarlett. "A nice black broadcloth is what
little girls wear." Seeing the small black brows coming together: "For
Heaven's sake, Rhett, tell her how unsuitable it would be and how dirty
it will get."

"Oh, let her have the blue velvet. If it gets dirty, we'll make her
another one," said Rhett easily.

So Bonnie had her blue velvet habit with a skirt that trailed down
the pony's side and a black hat with a red plume in it, because Aunt
Melly's stories of Jeb Stuart's plume had appealed to her imagination.
On days that were bright and clear the two could be seen riding down
Peachtree Street, Rhett reining in his big black horse to keep pace
with the fat pony's gait. Sometimes they went tearing down the quiet
roads about the town, scattering chickens and dogs and children, Bonnie
beating Mr. Butler with her crop, her tangled curls flying, Rhett
holding in his horse with a firm hand that she might think Mr. Butler
was winning the race.

When he had assured himself of her seat, her hands, her utter
fearlessness, Rhett decided that the time had come for her to learn to
make the low jumps that were within the reach of Mr. Butler's short
legs. To this end, he built a hurdle in the back yard and paid Wash,
one of Uncle Peter's small nephews, twenty-five cents a day to teach
Mr. Butler to jump. He began with a bar two inches from the ground and
gradually worked up the height to a foot.

This arrangement met with the disapproval of the three parties
concerned, Wash, Mr. Butler and Bonnie. Wash was afraid of horses and
only the princely sum offered induced him to take the stubborn pony
over the bar dozens of times a day; Mr. Butler, who bore with
equanimity having his tail pulled by his small mistress and his hooves
examined constantly, felt that the Creator of ponies had not intended
him to put his fat body over the bar; Bonnie, who could not bear to see
anyone else upon her pony, danced with impatience while Mr. Butler was
learning his lessons.

When Rhett finally decided that the pony knew his business well
enough to trust Bonnie upon him, the child's excitement was boundless.
She made her first jump with flying colors and, thereafter, riding
abroad with her father held no charms for her. Scarlett could not help
laughing at the pride and enthusiasm of father and daughter. She
thought, however, that once the novelty had passed, Bonnie would turn
to other things and the neighborhood would have some peace. But this
sport did not pall. There was a bare track worn from the arbor at the
far end of the yard to the hurdle, and all morning long the yard
resounded with excited yells. Grandpa Merriwether, who had made the
overland trip in 1849, said that the yells sounded just like an Apache
after a successful scalping.

After the first week, Bonnie begged for a higher bar, a bar that was
a foot and a half from the ground.

"When you are six years old," said Rhett. "Then you'll be big enough
for a higher jump and I'll buy you a bigger horse. Mr. Butler's legs
aren't long enough."

"They are, too, I jumped Aunt Melly's rose bushes and they are
'normously high!"

"No, you must wait," said Rhett, firm for once. But the firmness
gradually faded away before her incessant importunings and
tantrums.

"Oh, all right," he said with a laugh one morning and moved the
narrow white cross bar higher. "If you fall off, don't cry and blame
me!"

"Mother!" screamed Bonnie, turning her head up toward Scarlett's
bedroom. "Mother! Watch me! Daddy says I can!"

Scarlett, who was combing her hair, came to the window and smiled
down at the tiny excited figure, so absurd in the soiled blue
habit.

"I really must get her another habit," she thought. "Though Heaven
only knows how I'll make her give up that dirty one."

"Mother, watch!"

"I'm watching dear," said Scarlett smiling.

As Rhett lifted the child and set her on the pony, Scarlett called
with a swift rush of pride at the straight back and the proud set of
the head,

"You're mighty pretty, precious!"

"So are you," said Bonnie generously and, hammering a heel into Mr.
Butler's ribs, she galloped down the yard toward the arbor.

"Mother, watch me take this one!" she cried, laying on the crop.

WATCH ME TAKE THIS ONE!

Memory rang a bell far back in Scarlett's mind. There was something
ominous about those words. What was it? Why couldn't she remember? She
looked down at her small daughter, so lightly poised on the galloping
pony and her brow wrinkled as a chill swept swiftly through her breast.
Bonnie came on with a rush, her crisp black curls jerking, her blue
eyes blazing.

"They are like Pa's eyes," thought Scarlett, "Irish blue eyes and
she's just like him in every way."

And, as she thought of Gerald, the memory for which she had been
fumbling came to her swiftly, came with the heart stopping clarity of
summer lightning, throwing, for an instant, a whole countryside into
unnatural brightness. She could hear an Irish voice singing, hear the
hard rapid pounding of hooves coming up the pasture hill at Tara, hear
a reckless voice, so like the voice of her child: "Ellen! Watch me take
this one!"

"No!" she cried. "No! Oh, Bonnie, stop!"

Even as she leaned from the window there was a fearful sound of
splintering wood, a hoarse cry from Rhett, a melee of blue velvet and
flying hooves on the ground. Then Mr. Butler scrambled to his feet and
trotted off with an empty saddle.


On the third night after Bonnie's death, Mammy waddled slowly up the
kitchen steps of Melanie's house. She was dressed in black from her
huge men's shoes, slashed to permit freedom for her toes, to her black
head rag. Her blurred old eyes were bloodshot and red rimmed, and
misery cried out in every line of her mountainous figure. Her face was
puckered in the sad bewilderment of an old ape but there was
determination in her jaw.

She spoke a few soft words to Dilcey who nodded kindly, as though an
unspoken armistice existed in their old feud. Dilcey put down the
supper dishes she was holding and went quietly through the pantry
toward the dining room. In a minute Melanie was in the kitchen, her
table napkin in her hand, anxiety in her face.

"Miss Scarlet isn't—"

"Miss Scarlett bearin' up, same as allus," said Mammy heavily. "Ah
din' ten ter 'sturb yo' supper, Miss Melly. Ah kin wait tell you thoo
ter tell you whut Ah got on mah mine."

"Supper can wait," said Melanie. "Dilcey, serve the rest of the
supper. Mammy, come with me."

Mammy waddled after her, down the hall past the dining room where
Ashley sat at the head of the table, his own little Beau beside him and
Scarlett's two children opposite, making a great clatter with their
soup spoons. The happy voices of Wade and Ella filled the room. It was
like a picnic for them to spend so long a visit with Aunt Melly. Aunt
Melly was always so kind and she was especially so now. The death of
their younger sister had affected them very little. Bonnie had fallen
off her pony and Mother had cried a long time and Aunt Melly had taken
them home with her to play in the back yard with Beau and have tea
cakes whenever they wanted them.

Melanie led the way to the small book-lined sitting room, shut the
door and motioned Mammy to the sofa.

"I was going over right after supper," she said. "Now that Captain
Butler's mother has come, I suppose the funeral will be tomorrow
morning."

"De fune'l. Dat's jes' it," said Mammy. "Miss Melly, we's all in
deep trouble an' Ah's come ter you fer he'p. Ain' nuthin' but weery
load, honey, nuthin' but weery load."

"Has Miss Scarlett collapsed?" questioned Melanie worriedly. "I've
hardly seen her since Bonnie— She has been in her room and Captain
Butler has been out of the house and—"

Suddenly tears began to flow down Mammy's black face. Melanie sat
down beside her and patted her arm and, after a moment, Mammy lifted
the hem of her black skirt and dried her eyes.

"You got ter come he'p us, Miss Melly. Ah done de bes' Ah kin but it
doan do no good."

"Miss Scarlett—"

Mammy straightened.

"Miss Melly, you knows Miss Scarlett well's Ah does. Whut dat chile
got ter stan', de good Lawd give her strent ter stan'. Disyere done
broke her heart but she kin stan' it. It's Mist' Rhett Ah come
'bout."

"I have so wanted to see him but whenever I've been there, he has
either been downtown or locked in his room with— And Scarlett has
looked like a ghost and wouldn't speak— Tell me quickly, Mammy. You
know I'll help if I can."

Mammy wiped her nose on the back of her hand.

"Ah say Miss Scarlett kin stan' whut de Lawd sen', kase she done had
ter stan' a-plen'y, but Mist' Rhett—Miss Melly, he ain' never had ter
stan' nuthin' he din' wanter stan', not nuthin'. It's him Ah come ter
see you 'bout."

"But—"

"Miss Melly, you got ter come home wid me, dis evenin'." There was
urgency in Mammy's voice. "Maybe Mist' Rhett lissen ter you. He allus
did think a heap of yo' 'pinion."

"Oh, Mammy, what is it? What do you mean?"

Mammy squared her shoulders.

"Miss Melly, Mist' Rhett done—done los' his mine. He woan let us
put Lil Miss away."

"Lost his mind? Oh, Mammy, no!"

"Ah ain' lyin'. It's de Gawd's truff. He ain' gwine let us buhy dat
chile. He done tole me so hisseff, not mo'n an hour ago."

"But he can't—he isn't—"

"Dat's huccome Ah say he los' his mine."

"But why—"

"Miss Melly, Ah tell you eve'ything. Ah oughtn' tell nobody, but you
is our fambly an' you is de onlies' one Ah kin tell. Ah tell you
eve'ything. You knows whut a sto' he set by dat chile. Ah ain' never
seed no man, black or w'ite, set sech a sto' by any chile. Look lak he
go plumb crazy w'en Doctah Meade say her neck broke. He grab his gun
an' he run right out an' shoot dat po' pony an', fo' Gawd, Ah think he
gwine shoot hisseff. Ah wuz plumb 'stracted whut wid Miss Scarlett in a
swoon an' all de neighbors in an' outer de house an' Mist' Rhett
cahyin' on an' jes' holin' dat chile an' not even lettin' me wash her
lil face whar de grabble cut it. An' w'en Miss Scarlett come to, Ah
think, bress Gawd! Now dey kin comfo't each other."

Again the tears began to fall but this time Mammy did not even wipe
them away.

"But w'en she come to, she go inter de room whar he settin', holin'
Miss Bonnie, an' she say: 'Gimme mah baby whut you kilt.'"

"Oh, no! She couldn't!"

"Yas'm. Dat whut she say. She say: 'You kilt her.' An' Ah felt so
sorry fer Mist' Rhett Ah bust out cryin', kase he look lak a whup
houn'. An' Ah say: 'Give dat chile ter its mammy. Ah ain' gwine have no
sech goin's on over mah Lil Miss.' An' Ah tek de chile away frum him
an' tek her inter her room an' wash her face. An' Ah hear dem talkin'
an' it lak ter tuhn mah blood cole, whut dey say. Miss Scarlett wuz
callin' him a mudderer fer lettin' her try ter jump dat high, an' him
sayin' Miss Scarlett hadn' never keered nuthin' 'bout Miss Bonnie nor
none of her chillun...."

"Stop, Mammy! Don't tell me any more. It isn't right for you to tell
me this!" cried Melanie, her mind shrinking away from the picture
Mammy's words evoked.

"Ah knows Ah got no bizness tellin' you, but mah heart too full ter
know jes' whut not ter say. Den he tuck her ter de unnertaker's hisseff
an' he bring her back an' he put her in her baid in his room. An' w'en
Miss Scarlett say she b'long in de pahlor in de coffin, Ah thought
Mist' Rhett gwine hit her. An' he say, right cole lak: 'She b'long in
mah room.' An' he tuhn ter me an' he say: 'Mammy, you see dat she stay
right hyah tell Ah gits back.' Den he light outer de house on de hawse
an' he wuz gone tell 'bout sundown. W'en he come t'arin' home, Ah seed
dat he'd been drinkin' an' drinkin' heavy, but he wuz cahyin' it well's
usual. He fling inter de house an' not even speak ter Miss Scarlett or
Miss Pitty or any of de ladies as wuz callin', but he fly up de steps
an' th'ow open de do' of his room an' den he yell for me. W'en Ah comes
runnin' as fas' as Ah kin, he wuz stan'in' by de baid an' it wuz so
dahk in de room Ah couldn' sceercely see him, kase de shutters wuz done
drawed.

"An' he say ter me, right fierce lak: 'Open dem shutters. It's dahk
in hyah.' An' Ah fling dem open an' he look at me an', fo' Gawd, Miss
Melly, mah knees 'bout give way, kase he look so strange. Den he say:
'Bring lights. Bring lots of lights. An' keep dem buhnin'. An' doan
draw no shades an' no shutters. Doan you know Miss Bonnie's 'fraid of
de dahk?'"

Melanie's horror struck eyes met Mammy's and Mammy nodded
ominously.

"Dat's whut he say. 'Miss Bonnie's 'fraid of de dahk.'"

Mammy shivvered.

"W'en Ah gits him a dozen candles, he say 'Git!' An' den he lock de
do' an' dar he set wid Lil Miss, an' he din' open de do' fer Miss
Scarlett even w'en she beat an' hollered ter him. An' dat's de way it
been fer two days. He woan say nuthin' 'bout de fune'l, an' in de
mawnin' he lock de do' an' git on his hawse an' go off ter town. An' he
come back at sundown drunk an' lock hisseff in agin, an' he ain' et
nuthin' or slept none. An' now his ma, Ole Miss Butler, she come frum
Cha'ston fer de fune'l an' Miss Suellen an' Mist' Will, dey come frum
Tara, but Mist' Rhett woan talk ter none of dem. Oh, Miss Melly, it
been awful! An' it's gwine be wuss, an' folks gwine talk sumpin'
scan'lous.

"An' den, dis evenin'," Mammy paused and again wiped her nose on her
hand. "Dis evenin' Miss Scarleft ketch him in de upstairs hall w'en he
come in, an' she go in de room wid him an' she say: 'De fune'l set fer
termorrer mawnin'.' An' he say: 'Do dat an' Ah kills you
termorrer.'"

"Oh, he must have lost his mind!"

"Yas'm. An' den dey talks kinder low an' Ah doan hear all whut dey
say, 'cept he say agin 'bout Miss Bonnie bein' sceered of de dahk an'
de grabe pow'ful dahk. An' affer aw'ile, Miss Scarlett say: 'You is a
fine one ter tek on so, affer killin' her ter please yo' pride.' An' he
say: 'Ain' you got no mercy?' An' she say: 'No. An' Ah ain' got no
chile, needer. An' Ah'm wo'out wid de way you been ackin' sence Bonnie
wuz kilt. You is a scan'al ter de town. You been drunk all de time an'
ef you doan think Ah knows whar you been spendin' yo' days, you is a
fool. Ah knows you been down ter dat creeter's house, dat Belle
Watling.'"

"Oh, Mammy, no!"

"Yas'm. Dat whut she said. An', Miss Melly, it's de truff. Niggers
knows a heap of things quicker dan w'ite folks, an' Ah knowed dat's
whar he been but Ah ain' said nuthin' 'bout it. An' he doan deny it. He
say: 'Yas'm, dat's whar Ah been an' you neen tek on, kase you doan give
a damn. A bawdy house is a haben of refuge affer dis house of hell. An'
Belle is got one of de worl's kines' hearts. She doan th'ow it up ter
me dat Ah done kilt mah chile.'"

"Oh," cried Melanie, stricken to the heart.

Her own life was so pleasant, so sheltered, so wrapped about with
people who loved her, so full of kindness that what Mammy told her was
almost beyond comprehension or belief. Yet there crawled into her mind
a memory, a picture which she hastily put from her, as she would put
from her the thought of another's nudity. Rhett had spoken of Belle
Watling the day he cried with his head on her knees. But he loved
Scarlett. She could not have been mistaken that day. And of course,
Scarlett loved him. What had come between them? How could a husband and
a wife cut each other to pieces with such sharp knives?

Mammy took up her story heavily.

"Affer a w'ile, Miss Scarlett come outer de room, w'ite as a sheet
but her jaw set, an' she see me stan'in' dar an' she say: 'De fune'l be
termorrer, Mammy.' An' she pass me by lak a ghos'. Den mah heart tuhn
over, kase whut Miss Scarlett say, she mean. An' whut Mist' Rhett say,
he mean too. An' he say he kill her ef she do dat. Ah wuz plumb
'stracted, Miss Melly, kase Ah done had sumpin' on mah conscience all
de time an' it weighin' me down. Miss Melly, it wuz me as sceered Lil
Miss of de dahk."

"Oh, but Mammy, it doesn't matter—not now."

"Yas'm, it do. Dat whut de whole trouble. An' it come ter me Ah
better tell Mist' Rhett even ef he kill me, kase it on mah conscience.
So Ah slip in de do' real quick, fo' he kin lock it, an' Ah say: 'Mist'
Rhett, Ah's come ter confess.' An' he swung roun' on me lak a crazy man
an' say: 'Git!' An', fo' Gawd, Ah ain' never been so sceered! But Ah
say: 'Please, suh, Mist' Rhett, let me tell you. It's 'bout ter kill
me. It wuz me as sceered Lil Miss of de dahk.' An' den, Miss Melly, Ah
put mah haid down an' waited fer him ter hit me. But he din' say
nuthin'. An' An say: 'Ah din' mean no hahm. But, Mist' Rhett, dat chile
din' have no caution an' she wuzn' sceered of nuthin'. An' she wuz
allus gittin' outer baid affer eve'ybody sleep an runnin' roun' de
house barefoot. An' it worrit me, kase Ah 'fraid she hu't herseff. So
Ah tells her dar's ghos'es an' buggerboos in de dahk.'

"An' den—Miss Melly, you know whut he done? His face got right
gentle lak an' he come ter me an' put his han' on mah arm. Dat's de
fust time he ever done dat. An' he say: 'She wuz so brave, wuzn' she?
'Cept fer de dahk, she wuzn' sceered of nuthin'.' An' wen Ah bust out
cryin' he say: 'Now, Mammy,' an' he pat me. 'Now, Mammy, doan you cahy
on so. Ah's glad you tole me. Ah knows you love Miss Bonnie an' kase
you love her, it doan matter. It's whut de heart is dat matter.' Well'm
dat kinder cheered me up, so Ah ventu' ter say: 'Mist Rhett, suh, what
'bout de fune'l?' Den he tuhn on me lak a wile man an' his eyes glitter
an' he say: 'Good Gawd, Ah thought you'd unnerstan' even ef nobody else
din'! Does you think Ah'm gwine ter put mah chile away in de dahk w'en
she so sceered of it? Right now Ah kin hear de way she uster scream
w'en she wake up in de dahk. Ah ain' gwine have her sceered.' Miss
Melly, den Ah know he los' his mine. He drunk an' he need sleep an'
sumpin' ter eat but dat ain' all. He plumb crazy. He jes' push me outer
de do' an' say: 'Git de hell outer hyah!'

"Ah goes downstairs an' Ah gits ter thinkin' dat he say dar ain'
gwine be no fune'l an' Miss Scarlett say it be termorrer mawnin' an' he
say dar be shootin'. An' all de kin-folks in de house an' all de
neighbors already gabblin' 'bout it lak a flock of guinea hens, an' Ah
thought of you, Miss Melly. You got ter come he'p us."

"Oh, Mammy, I couldn't intrude!"

"Ef you kain, who kin?"

"But what could I do, Mammy?"

"Miss Melly, Ah doan know. But you kin do sumpin'. You kin talk ter
Mist' Rhett an' maybe he lissen ter you. He set a gret sto' by you,
Miss Melly. Maybe you doan know it, but he do. Ah done hear him say
time an' agin, you is de onlies' gret lady he knows."

"But—"

Melanie rose to her feet, confused, her heart quailing at the
thought of confronting Rhett. The thought of arguing with a man as
grief crazed as the one Mammy depicted made her go cold. The thought of
entering that brightly lighted room where lay the little girl she loved
so much wrung her heart. What could she do? What could she say to Rhett
that would ease his grief and bring him back to reason? For a moment
she stood irresolute and through the closed door came the sound of her
boy's treble laughter. Like a cold knife in her heart came the thought
of him dead. Suppose her Beau were lying upstairs, his little body cold
and still, his merry laughter hushed.

"Oh," she cried aloud, in fright, and in her mind she clutched him
close to her heart. She knew how Rhett felt. If Beau were dead, how
could she put him away, alone with the wind and the rain and the
darkness?

"Oh! Poor, poor Captain Butler!" she cried. "I'll go to him now,
right away."

She sped back to the dining room, said a few soft words to Ashley
and surprised her little boy by hugging him close to her and kissing
his blond curls passionately.

She left the house without a hat, her dinner napkin still clutched
in her hand, and the pace she set was hard for Mammy's old legs. Once
in Scarlett's front hall, she bowed briefly to the gathering in the
library, to the frightened Miss Pittypat, the stately old Mrs. Butler,
Will and Suellen. She went up the stairs swiftly, with Mammy panting
behind her. For a moment, she paused before Scarlett's closed door but
Mammy hissed, "No'm, doan do dat."

Down the hall Melly went, more slowly now, and stopped in front of
Rhett's room. She stood irresolutely for a moment as though she longed
to take flight. Then, bracing herself, like a small soldier going into
battle, she knocked on the door and called softly: "Please let me in,
Captain Butler. It's Mrs. Wilkes. I want to see Bonnie."

The door opened quickly and Mammy, shrinking back into the shadows
of the hall, saw Rhett huge and dark against the blazing background of
candles. He was swaying on his feet and Mammy could smell the whisky on
his breath. He looked down at Melly for a moment and then, taking her
by the arm, he pulled her into the room and shut the door.

Mammy edged herself stealthily to a chair beside the door and sank
into it wearily, her shapeless body overflowing it. She sat still,
weeping silently and praying. Now and then she lifted the hem of her
dress and wiped her eyes. Strain her ears as hard as she might, she
could hear no words from the room, only a low broken humming sound.

Alter an interminable period, the door cracked open and Melly's face
white and strained, appeared.

"Bring me a pot of coffee, quickly, and some sandwiches."

When the devil drove, Mammy could be as swift as a lithe black
sixteen-year-old and her curiosity to get into Rhett's room made her
work faster. But her hope turned to disappointment when Melly merely
opened the door a crack and took the tray. For a long time Mammy
strained her sharp ears but she could distinguish nothing except the
clatter of silver on china, and the muffled soft tones of Melanie's
voice. Then she heard the creaking of the bed as a heavy body fell upon
it and, soon after, the sound of boots dropping to the floor. After an
interval, Melanie appeared in the doorway but, strive though she might,
Mammy could not see past her into the room. Melanie looked tired and
there were tears glistening on her lashes but her face was serene
again.

"Go tell Miss Scarlett that Captain Butler is quite willing for the
funeral to take place tomorrow morning," she whispered.

"Bress Gawd!" ejaculated Mammy. "How on uth—"

"Don't talk so loud. He's going to sleep. And, Mammy, tell Miss
Scarlett, too, that I'll be here all night and you bring me some
coffee. Bring it here."

"Ter disyere room?"

"Yes, I promised Captain Butler that if he would go to sleep I would
sit up by her all night. Now go tell Miss Scarlett, so she won't worry
any more."

Mammy started off down the hall, her weight shaking the floor, her
relieved heart singing "Halleluja! Hallelujah!" She paused thoughtfully
outside of Scarlett's door, her mind in a ferment of thankfulness and
curiosity.

"How Miss Melley done it beyon' me. De angels fight on her side, Ah
specs. Ah'll tell Miss Scarlett de fune'l termorrer but Ah specs Ah
better keep hid dat Miss Melly settin' up wid Lil Miss. Miss Scarlett
ain' gwine lak dat a-tall."

CHAPTER LX

Something was wrong with the world, a somber, frightening wrongness
that pervaded everything like a dark impenetrable mist, stealthily
closing around Scarlett. This wrongness went even deeper than Bonnie's
death, for now the first unbearable anguish was fading into resigned
acceptance of her loss. Yet this eerie sense of disaster to come
persisted, as though something black and hooded stood just at her
shoulder, as though the ground beneath her feet might turn to quicksand
as she trod upon it.

She had never before known this type of fear. All her life her feet
had been firmly planted in common sense and the only things she had
ever feared had been the things she could see, injury, hunger, poverty,
loss of Ashley's love. Unanalytical she was trying to analyze now and
with no success. She had lost her dearest child but she could stand
that, somehow, as she had stood other crushing losses. She had her
health, she had as much money as she could wish and she still had
Ashley, though she saw less and less of him these days. Even the
constraint which had been between them since the day of Melanie's
ill-starred surprise party did not worry her, for she knew it would
pass. No, her fear was not of pain or hunger or loss of love. Those
fears had never weighed her down as this feeling of wrongness was
doing—this blighting fear that was oddly like that which she knew in
her old nightmare, a thick, swimming mist through which she ran with
bursting heart, a lost child seeking a haven that was hidden from
her.

She remembered how Rhett had always been able to laugh her out of
her fears. She remembered the comfort of his broad brown chest and his
strong arms. And so she turned to him with eyes that really saw him for
the first time in weeks. And the change she saw shocked her. This man
was not going to laugh, nor was he going to comfort her.

For some time after Bonnie's death she had been too angry with him,
too preoccupied with her own grief to do more than speak politely in
front of the servants. She had been too busy

=== SCENE 119 ===
rly proud of the
child's horsemanship, overly indulgent to her wheedlings. Now she would
willingly have humbled herself and admitted that she had only hurled
that accusation at him out of her misery, hoping by hurting him to
alleviate her own hurt. But there never seemed an opportune moment. He
looked at her out of black blank eyes that made no opportunity for her
to speak. And apologies, once postponed, became harder and harder to
make, and finally impossible.

She wondered why this should be. Rhett was her husband and between
them there was the unbreakable bond of two people who have shared the
same bed, begotten and borne a loved child and seen that child, too
soon, laid away in the dark. Only in the arms of the father of that
child could she find comfort, in the exchange of memories and grief
that might hurt at first but would help to heal. But, now, as matters
stood between them, she would as soon go to the arms of a complete
stranger.

He was seldom at home. When they did sit down to supper together, he
was usually drunk. He was not drinking as he had formerly, becoming
increasingly more polished and biting as the liquor took hold of him,
saying amusing, malicious things that made her laugh in spite of
herself. Now he was silently, morosely drunk and, as the evenings
progressed, soddenly drunk. Sometimes, in the early hours of the dawn,
she heard him ride into the back yard and beat on the door of the
servants' house so that Pork might help him up the back stairs and put
him to bed. Put him to bed! Rhett who had always drunk others under the
table without turning a hair and then put them to bed.

He was untidy now, where once he had been well groomed, and it took
all Pork's scandalized arguing even to make him change his linen before
supper. Whisky was showing in his face and the hard line of his long
jaw was being obscured under an unhealthy bloat and puffs rising under
his bloodshot eyes. His big body with its hard swelling muscles looked
soft and slack and his waist line began to thicken.

Often he did not come home at all or even send word that he would be
away overnight. Of course, he might be snoring drunkenly in some room
above a saloon, but Scarlett always believed that he was at Belle
Watling's house on these occasions. Once she had seen Belle in a store,
a coarse overblown woman now, with most of her good looks gone. But,
for all her paint and flashy clothes, she was buxom and almost motherly
looking. Instead of dropping her eyes or glaring defiantly, as did
other light women when confronted by ladies, Belle gave her stare for
stare, searching her face with an intent, almost pitying look that
brought a flush to Scarlett's cheek.

But she could not accuse him now, could not rage at him, demand
fidelity or try to shame him, any more than she could bring herself to
apologize for accusing him of Bonnie's death. She was clutched by a
bewildered apathy, an unhappiness that she could not understand, an
unhappiness that went deeper than anything she had ever known. She was
lonely and she could never remember being so lonely before. Perhaps she
had never had the time to be very lonely until now. She was lonely and
afraid and there was no one to whom she could turn, no one except
Melanie. For now, even Mammy, her mainstay, had gone back to Tara. Gone
permanently.

Mammy gave no explanation for her departure. Her tired old eyes
looked sadly at Scarlett when she asked for the train fare home. To
Scarlett's tears and pleading that she stay, Mammy only answered: "Look
ter me lak Miss Ellen say ter me: 'Mammy, come home. Yo' wuk done
finish.' So Ah's gwine home."

Rhett, who had listened to the talk, gave Mammy the money and patted
her arm.

"You're right, Mammy. Miss Ellen is right. Your work here is done.
Go home. Let me know if you ever need anything." And as Scarlett broke
into renewed indignant commands: "Hush, you fool! Let her go! Why
should anyone want to stay in this house—now?"

There was such a savage bright glitter in his eyes when he spoke
that Scarlett shrank from him, frightened.

"Dr. Meade, do you think he can—can have lost his mind?" she
questioned afterwards, driven to the doctor by her own sense of
helplessness.

"No," said the doctor, "but he's drinking like a fish and will kill
himself if he keeps it up. He loved the child, Scarlett, and I guess he
drinks to forget about her. Now, my advice to you, Miss, is to give him
another baby just as quickly as you can."

"Hah!" thought Scarlett bitterly, as she left his office. That was
easier said than done. She would gladly have another child, several
children, if they would take that look out of Rhett's eyes and fill up
the aching spaces in her own heart. A boy who had Rhett's dark
handsomeness and another little girl. Oh, for another girl, pretty and
gay and willful and full of laughter, not like the giddy-brained Ella.
Why, oh, why couldn't God have taken Ella if He had to take one of her
children? Ella was no comfort to her, now that Bonnie was gone. But
Rhett did not seem to want any other children. At least he never came
to her bedroom though now the door was never locked and usually
invitingly ajar. He did not seem to care. He did not seem to care for
anything now except whisky and that blowzy red-haired woman.

He was bitter now, where he had been pleasantly jeering, brutal
where his thrusts had once been tempered with humor. After Bonnie died,
many of the good ladies of the neighborhood who had been won over to
him by his charming manners with his daughter were anxious to show him
kindness. They stopped him on the street to give him their sympathy and
spoke to him from over their hedges, saying that they understood. But
now that Bonnie, the reason for his good manners, was gone the manners
went to. He cut the ladies and their well-meant condolences off
shortly, rudely.

But, oddly enough, the ladies were not offended. They understood, or
thought they understood. When he rode home in the twilight almost too
drunk to stay in the saddle, scowling at those who spoke to him, the
ladies said "Poor thing!" and redoubled their efforts to be kind and
gentle. They felt very sorry for him, broken hearted and riding home to
no better comfort than Scarlett.

Everybody knew how cold and heartless she was. Everybody was
appalled at the seeming ease with which she had recovered from Bonnie's
death, never realizing or caring to realize the effort that lay behind
that seeming recovery. Rhett had the town's tenderest sympathy and he
neither knew nor cared. Scarlett had the town's dislike and, for once,
she would have welcomed the sympathy of old friends.

Now, none of her old friends came to the house, except Aunt Pitty,
Melanie and Ashley. Only the new friends came calling in their shining
carriages, anxious to tell her of their sympathy, eager to divert her
with gossip about other new friends in whom she was not at all
interested. All these "new people," strangers, every one!

=== SCENE 120 ===
no cronies with whom she could refight old battles. Oh, to
be with her own kind of people again, those people who had been through
the same things and knew how they hurt—and yet how great a part of you
they were!

But, somehow, these people had slipped away. She realized that it
was her own fault. She had never cared until now—now that Bonnie was
dead and she was lonely and afraid and she saw across her shining
dinner table a swarthy sodden stranger disintegrating under her
eyes.

CHAPTER LXI

Scarlett was in Marietta when Rhett's urgent telegram came. There
was a train leaving for Atlanta in ten minutes and she caught it,
carrying no baggage except her reticule and leaving Wade and Ella at
the hotel with Prissy.

Atlanta was only twenty miles away but the train crawled
interminably through the wet early autumn afternoon, stopping at every
bypath for passengers. Panic stricken at Rhett's message, mad for
speed, Scarlett almost screamed at every halt. Down the road lumbered
the train through forests faintly, tiredly gold, past red hillsides
still scarred with serpentine breastworks, past old battery
emplacements and weed-grown craters, down the road over which
Johnston's men had retreated so bitterly, fighting every step of the
way. Each station, each crossroad the conductor called was the name of
a battle, the site of a skirmish. Once they would have stirred Scarlett
to memories of terror but now she had no thought for them.

Rhett's message had been:

"Mrs. Wilkes ill. Come home immediately."

Twilight had fallen when the train pulled into Atlanta and a light
misting rain obscured the town. The gas street lamps glowed dully,
blobs of yellow in the fog. Rhett was waiting for her at the depot with
the carriage. The very sight of his face frightened her more than his
telegram. She had never seen it so expressionless before.

"She isn't—" she cried.

"No. She's still alive." Rhett assisted her into the carriage. "To
Mrs. Wilkes' house and as fast as you can go," he ordered the
coachman.

"What's the matter with her? I didn't know she was ill. She looked
all right last week. Did she have an accident? Oh, Rhett, it isn't
really as serious as you—"

"She's dying," said Rhett and his voice had no more expression than
his face. "She wants to see you."

"Not Melly! Oh, not Melly! What's happened to her?"

"She's had a miscarriage."

"A—a-mis—but, Rhett, she—" Scarlett floundered. This information
on top of the horror of his announcement took her breath away.

"You did not know she was going to have a baby?"

She could not even shake her head.

"Ah, well. I suppose not. I don't think she told anyone. She wanted
it to be a surprise. But I knew."

"You knew? But surely she didn't tell you!"

"She didn't have to tell me. I knew. She's been so—happy these last
two months I knew it couldn't mean anything else."

"But Rhett, the doctor said it would kill her to have another
baby!"

"It has killed her," said Rhett. And to the coachman: "For God's
sake, can't you drive faster?"

"But, Rhett, she can't be dying! I—I didn't and I—"

"She hasn't your strength. She's never had any strength. She's never
had anything but heart."

The carriage rocked to a standstill in front of the flat little
house and Rhett handed her out. Trembling, frightened, a sudden feeling
of loneliness upon her, she clasped his arm.

"You're coming in, Rhett?"

"No," he said and got back into the carriage.

She flew up the front steps, across the porch and threw open the
door. There, in the yellow lamplight were Ashley, Aunt Pitty and India.
Scarlett thought: "What's India doing here? Melanie told her never to
set foot in this house again." The three rose at the sight of her, Aunt
Pitty biting her trembling lips to still them, India staring at her,
grief stricken and without hate. Ashley looked dull as a sleepwalker
and, as he came to her and

=== SCENE 121 ===
a pony—and music lessons— Oh, please, Melly, do try!
Do make an effort!"

The silence fell again and on Melanie's face there were signs of a
struggle to gather strength to speak.

"Ashley," she said. "Ashley and you—" Her voice faltered into
stillness.

At the mention of Ashley's name, Scarlett's heart stood still, cold
as granite within her. Melanie had known all the time. Scarlett dropped
her head on the coverlet and a sob that would not rise caught her
throat with a cruel hand. Melanie knew. Scarlett was beyond shame now,
beyond any feeling save a wild remorse that she had hurt this gentle
creature throughout the long years. Melanie had known—and yet, she had
remained her loyal friend. Oh, if she could only live those years over
again! She would never even let her eyes meet those of Ashley.

"O God," she prayed rapidly, "do, please, let her live! I'll make it
up to her. I'll be so good to her. I'll never even speak to Ashley
again as long as I live, if You'll only let her get well!"

"Ashley," said Melanie feebly and her fingers reached out to touch
Scarlett's bowed head. Her thumb and forefinger tugged with no more
strength than that of a baby at Scarlett's hair. Scarlett knew what
that meant, knew Melanie wanted her to look up. But she could not,
could not meet Melanie's eyes and read that knowledge in them.

"Ashley," Melanie whispered again and Scarlett gripped herself. When
she looked God in the face on the Day of Judgment and read her sentence
in His eyes, it would not be as bad as this. Her soul cringed but she
raised her head.

She saw only the same dark loving eyes, sunken and drowsy with
death, the same tender mouth tiredly fighting pain for breath. No
reproach was there, no accusation and no fear—only an anxiety that she
might not find strength for words.

For a moment Scarlett was too stunned to even feel relief. Then, as
she held Melanie's hand more closely, a flood of warm gratitude to God
swept over her and, for the first time since her childhood, she said a
humble, unselfish prayer.

"Thank You, God. I know I'm not worth it but thank You for not
letting her know."

"What about Ashley, Melly?"

"You'll—look after him?"

"Oh, yes."

"He catches cold—so easily."

There was a pause.

"Look after—his business—you understand?"

"Yes, I understand. I will."

She made a great effort.

"Ashley isn't—practical."

Only death could have forced that disloyalty from Melanie.

"Look after him, Scarlett—but—don't ever let him know."

"I'll look after him and the business too, and I'll never let him
know. I'll just kind of suggest things to him."

Melanie managed a small smile but it was a triumphant one as her
eyes met Scarlett's again. Their glance sealed the bargain that the
protection of Ashley Wilkes from a too harsh world was passing from one
woman to another and that Ashley's masculine pride should never be
humbled by this knowledge.

Now the struggle went out of the tired face as though with
Scarlett's promise, ease had come to her.

"You're so smart—so brave—always been so good to me—"

At these words, the sob came freely to Scarlett's throat and she
clapped her hand over her mouth. Now, she was going to bawl like a
child and cry out: "I've been a devil! I've wronged you so! I never did
anything for you! It was all for Ashley."

She rose to her feet abruptly, sinking her teeth into her thumb to
regain her control. Rhett's words came back to her again, "She loves
you. Let that be your cross." Well, the cross was heavier now. It was
bad enough that she had tried by every art to take Ashley from her. But
now it was worse that Melanie, who had trusted her blindly through
life, was laying the same love and trust on her in death. No, she could
not speak. She could not even say again: "Make an effort to live." She
must let her go easily, without a struggle, without tears, without
sorrow.

The door opened slightly and Dr. Meade stood on the threshold,
beckoning imperiously. Scarlett bent over the bed, choking back her
tears and taking Melanie's hand, laid it against her cheek.

"Good night," she said, and her voice was steadier than she thought
it possibly could be.

"Promise me—" came the whisper, very softly now.

"Anything, darling."

"Captain Butler—be kind to him. He—loves you so."

"Rhett?" thought Scarlett, bewildered, and the words meant nothing
to her.

"Yes, indeed," she said automatically and, pressing a light kiss on
the hand, laid it back on the bed.

"Tell the ladies to come in immediately," whispered the doctor as
she passed through the door.

Through blurred eyes she saw India and Pitty follow the doctor into
the room, holding their skirts close to their sides to keep them from
rustling. The door closed behind them and the house was still. Ashley
was nowhere to be

=== SCENE 122 ===
really understood him
for the first time in her life.

"Why—" she said slowly, "why, Ashley, you love her, don't you?"

He spoke as with an effort.

"She is the only dream I ever had that lived and breathed and did
not die in the face of reality."

"Dreams!" she thought, an old irritation stirring. "Always dreams
with him! Never common sense!"

With a heart that was heavy and a little bitter, she said: "You've
been such a fool, Ashley. Why couldn't you see that she was worth a
million of me?"

"Scarlett, please! If you only knew what I've gone through since the
doctor—"

"What you've gone through! Don't you think that I— Oh, Ashley, you
should have known, years ago, that you loved her and not me! Why didn't
you! Everything would have been so different, so— Oh, you should have
realized and not kept me dangling with all your talk about honor and
sacrifice! If you'd told me, years ago, I'd have— It would have killed
me but I could have stood it somehow. But you wait till now, till
Melly's dying, to find it out and now it's too late to do anything. Oh,
Ashley, men are supposed to know such things—not women! You should
have seen so clearly that you loved her all the time and only wanted me
like—like Rhett wants that Watling woman!"

He winced at her words but his eyes still met hers, imploring
silence, comfort. Every line of his face admitted the truth of her
words. The very droop of his shoulders showed that his own self-
castigation was more cruel than any she could give. He stood silent
before her, clutching the glove as though it were an understanding hand
and, in the stillness that followed her words, her indignation fell
away and pity, tinged with contempt, took its place. Her conscie

=== SCENE 123 ===
mportunate, jealous, sulky, pleading, like the other boys, the wild
infatuation which had possessed her would have passed, blowing away as
lightly as mist before sunshine and light wind when she met a new
man.

"What a fool I've been," she thought bitterly. "And now I've got to
pay for it. What I've wished for so often has happened. I've wished
Melly was dead so I could have him. And now she's dead and I've got him
and I don't want him. His damned honor will make him ask me if I want
to divorce Rhett and marry him. Marry him? I wouldn't have him on a
silver platter! But, just the same I've got him round my neck for the
rest of my life. As long as I live I'll have to look after him and see
that he doesn't starve and that people don't hurt his feelings. He'll
be just another child, clinging to my skirts. I've lost my lover and
I've got another child. And if I hadn't promised Melly, I'd—I wouldn't
care if I never saw him again."

CHAPTER LXII

She heard whispering voices outside, and going to the door she saw
the frightened negroes standing in the back hall, Dilcey with her arms
sagging under the heavy weight of the sleeping Beau, Uncle Peter
crying, and Cookie wiping her wide wet face on her apron. All three
looked at her, dumbly asking what they were to do now. She looked up
the hall toward the sitting room and saw India and Aunt Pitty standing
speechless, holding each other's hands and, for once, India had lost
her stiff-necked look. Like the negroes, they looked imploringly at
her, expecting her to give instructions. She walked into the sitting
room and the two women closed about her.

"Oh, Scarlett, what—" began Aunt Pitty, her fat, child's mouth
shaking.

"Don't speak to me or I'll scream," said Scarlett. Overwrought
nerves brought sharpness to her voice and her hands clenched at her
sides. The thought of speaking of Melanie now, of making the inevitable
arrangements that follow a death made her throat tighten. "I don't want
a word out of either of you."

At the authoritative note in her voice, they fell back, helpless
hurt looks on their faces. "I mustn't cry in front of them,"

=== SCENE 124 ===
anced hesitantly toward him, uncertainty taking
form in her mind at this new expression on his face. Without rising, he
pushed back a chair with his foot and she sank into it. She wished he
had not spoken of Melanie so soon. She did not want to talk of her now,
to re-live the agony of the last hour. There was all the rest of her
life in which to speak of Melanie. But it seemed to her now, driven by
a fierce desire to cry: "I love you," that there was only this night,
this hour, in which to tell Rhett what was in her mind. But there was
something in his face that stopped her and she was suddenly ashamed to
speak of love when Melanie was hardly cold.

"Well, God rest her," he said heavily. "She was the only completely
kind person I ever knew."

"Oh, Rhett!" she cried miserably, for his words brought up too
vividly all the kind things Melanie had ever done for her. "Why didn't
you come in with me? It was dreadful—and I needed you so!"

"I couldn't have borne it," he said simply and for a moment he was
silent. Then he spoke with an effort and said, softly: "A very great
lady."

His somber gaze went past her and in his eyes was the same look she
had seen in the light of the flames the night Atlanta fell, when he
told her he was going off with the retreating army—the surprise of a
man who knows himself utterly, yet discovers in himself unexpected
loyalties and emotions and feels a faint self-ridicule at the
discovery.

His moody eyes went over her shoulder as though he saw Melanie
silently passing through the room to the door. In the look of farewell
on his face there was no sorrow, no pain, only a speculative wonder at
himself, only a poignant stirring of emotions dead since boyhood, as he
said again: "A very great lady."

Scarlett shivered and the glow went from her heart, the fine warmth,
the splendor which had sent her home on winged feet. She half-grasped
what was in Rhett's mind as he said farewell to the only person in the
world he respected and she was desolate again with a terrible sense of
loss that was no longer personal. She could not wholly understand or
analyze what he was feeling, but it seemed almost as if she too had
been brushed by whispering skirts, touching her softly in a last
caress. She was seeing through Rhett's eyes the passing, not of a woman
but of a legend—the gentle, self-effacing but steel-spined women on
whom the South had builded its house in war and to whose proud and
loving arms it had returned in defeat.

His eyes came back to her and his voice changed. Now it was light
and cool.

"So she's dead. That makes it nice for you, doesn't it?"

"Oh, how can you say such things," she cried, stung, the quick tears
coming to her eyes. "You know how I loved her!"

"No, I can't say I did. Most unexpected and it's to your credit,
considering your passion for white trash, that you could appreciate her
at last."

"How can you talk so? Of course I appreciated her! You didn't. You
didn't know her like I did! It isn't in you to understand her— how
good she was—"

"Indeed? Perhaps not."

"She thought of everybody except herself—why, her last words were
about you."

There was a flash of genuine feeling in his eyes as he turned to
her.

"What did she say?"

"Oh, not now, Rhett."

"Tell me."

His voice was cool but the hand he put on her wrist hurt. She did
not want to tell, this was not the way she had intended to lead up to
the subject of her love but his hand was urgent.

"She said—she said— 'Be kind to Captain Butler. He loves you so
much.'"

He stared at her and dropped her wrist. His eyelids went down,
leaving his face dark and blank. Suddenly he rose and going to the
window, he drew the curtains and looked out intently as if there were
something to see out

=== SCENE 125 ===
ome leaping light of hope, of joy.
Surely he must know, now! But the smooth dark blankness which had
baffled her so often was all that her frantic, searching eyes could
find. He dropped her chin and, turning, walked back to his chair and
sprawled tiredly again, his chin on his breast, his eyes looking up at
her from under black brows in an impersonal speculative way.

She followed him back to his chair, her hands twisting, and stood
before him.

"You are wrong," she began again, finding words. "Rhett, tonight,
when I knew, I ran every step of the way home to tell you. Oh, darling,
I—"

"You are tired," he said, still watching her. "You'd better go to
bed."

"But I must tell you!"

"Scarlett," he said heavily, "I don't want to hear—anything."

"But you don't know what I'm going to say!"

"My pet, it's written plainly on your face. Something, someone has
made you realize that the unfortunate Mr. Wilkes is too large a
mouthful of Dead Sea fruit for even you to chew. And that same
something has suddenly set my charms before you in a new and attractive
light," he sighed slightly. "And it's no use to talk about it."

She drew a sharp surprised breath. Of course, he had always read her
easily. Heretofore she had resented it but now, after the first shock
at her own transparency, her heart rose with gladness and relief. He
knew, he understood and her task was miraculously made easy. No use to
talk about it! Of course he was bitter at her long neglect, of course
he was mistrustful of her sudden turnabout. She would have to woo him
with kindness, convince him with a rich outpouring of love, and what a
pleasure it would be to do it!

"Darling, I'm going to tell you everything," she said, putting her
hands on the arm of his chair and leaning down to him. "I've been so
wrong, such a stupid fool—"

"Scarlett, don't go on with this. Don't be humble before me. I can't
bear it. Leave us some dignity, some reticence to remember out of our
marriage. Spare us this last."

She straightened up abruptly. Spare us this last? What did he mean
by "this last"? Last? This was their first, their beginning.

"But I will tell you," she began rapidly, as if fearing his hand
upon her mouth, silencing her. "Oh, Rhett, I love you so, darling! I
must have loved you for years and I was such a fool I didn't know it.
Rhett, you must believe me!"

He looked at her, standing before him, for a moment, a long look
that went to the back of her mind. She saw there was belief in his eyes
but little interest. Oh, was he going to be mean, at this of all times?
To torment her, pay her back in her own coin?

"Oh, I believe you," he said at last. "But what of Ashley
Wilkes?"

"Ashley!" she said, and made an impatient gesture. "I—I don't
believe I've cared anything about him for ages. It was—well, a sort of
habit I hung onto from when I was a little girl. Rhett, I'd never even
thought I cared about him if I'd ever known what he was really like.
He's such a helpless, poor-spirited creature, for all his prattle about
truth and honor and—"

"No," said Rhett. "If you must see him as he really is, see him
straight. He's only a gentleman caught in a world he doesn't belong in,
trying to make a poor best of it by the rules of the world that's
gone."

"Oh, Rhett, don't let's talk of him! What does he matter now? Aren't
you glad to know— I mean, now that I—"

As his tired eyes met hers, she broke off in embarrassment, shy as a
girl with her first beau. If he'd only make it easier for her! If only
he would hold out his arms, so she could crawl thankfully into his lap
and lay her head on his chest. Her lips on his could tell him better
than all her stumbling words. But as she looked at him, she realized
that he was not holding her off just to be mean. He looked drained and
as though nothing she had said was of any moment.

"Glad?" he said. "Once I would have thanked God, fasting, to hear
you say all this. But, now, it doesn't matter."

"Doesn't matter? What are you talking about? Of course, it matters!
Rhett, you do care, don't you? You must care. Melly said you did."

"Well, she was right, as far as she knew. But, Scarlett, did it ever
occur to you that even the most deathless love could wear out?"

She looked at him speechless, her mouth a round O.

"Mine wore out," he went on, "against Ashley Wilkes and your insane
obstinacy that makes you hold on like a bulldog to anything you think
you want...Mine wore out."

"But love can't wear out!"

"Yours for Ashley did."

"But I never really loved Ashley!"

"Then, you certainly gave a good imitation of it—up till tonight.
Scarlett, I'm not upbraiding you, accusing you, reproaching you. That
time has passed. So spare me your defenses and your explanations. If
you can manage to listen to me for a few minutes without interrupting,
I can explain what I mean. Though God knows, I see no need for
explanations. The truth's so plain."

She sat down, the harsh gas light falling on her white bewildered
face. She looked into the eyes she knew so well—and knew so
little—listened to his quiet voice saying words which at first meant
nothing. This was the first time he had ever talked to her in this
manner, as one human being to another, talked as other people talked,
without flippancy, mockery or riddles.

"Did it ever occur to you that I loved you as much as a man can love
a woman? Loved you for years before I finally got you? During the war
I'd go away and try to forget you, but I couldn't and I always had to
come back. After the war I risked arrest, just to come back and find
you. I cared so much I believe I would have killed Frank Kennedy if he
hadn't died when he did. I loved you but I couldn't let you know it.
You're so brutal to those who love you, Scarlett. You take their love
and hold it over their heads like a whip."

Out of it all only the fact that he loved her meant anything. At the
faint echo of passion in his voice, pleasure and excitement crept back
into her. She sat, hardly breathing, listening, waiting.

"I knew you didn't love me when I married you. I knew about Ashley,
you see. But, fool that I was, I thought I could make you care. Laugh,
if you like, but I wanted to take care of you, to pet you, to give you
everything you wanted. I wanted to marry you and protect you and give
you a free rein in anything that would make you happy—just as I did
Bonnie. You'd had such a struggle, Scarlett. No one knew better than I
what you'd gone through and I wanted you to stop fighting and let me
fight for you. I wanted you to play, like a child—for you were a
child, a brave, frightened, bullheaded child. I think you are still a
child. No one but a child could be so headstrong and so
insensitive."

His voice was calm and tired but there was something in the quality
of it that raised a ghost of memory in Scarlett. She had heard a voice
like this once before and at some other crisis of her life. Where had
it been? The voice of a man facing himself and his world without
feeling, without flinching, without hope.

Why—why—it had been Ashley in the wintry, windswept orchard at
Tara, talking of life and shadow shows with a tired calmness that had
more finality in its timbre than any desperate bitterness could have
revealed. Even as Ashley's voice then had turned her cold with dread of
things she could not understand, so now Rhett's voice made her heart
sink. His voice, his manner, more than the content of his words,
disturbed her, made her realize that her pleasurable excitement of a
few moments ago had been untimely. Something was wrong, badly wrong.
What it was she did not know but she listened desperately, her eyes on
his brown face, hoping to hear words that would dissipate her
fears.

"It was so obvious that we were meant for each other. So obvious
that I was the only man of your acquaintance who could love you after
knowing you as you really are—hard and greedy and unscrupulous, like
me. I loved you and I took the chance. I thought Ashley would fade out
of your mind. But," he shrugged, "I tried everything I knew and nothing
worked. And I loved you so, Scarlett. If you had only let me, I could
have loved you as gently and as tenderly as ever a man loved a woman.
But I couldn't let you know, for I knew you'd think me weak and try to
use my love against me. And always—always there was Ashley. It drove
me crazy. I couldn't sit across the table from you every night, knowing
you wished Ashley was sitting there in my place. And I couldn't hold
you in my arms at night and know that—well, it doesn't matter now. I
wonder, now, why it hurt. That's what drove me to Belle. There is a
certain swinish comfort in being with a woman who loves you utterly and
respects you for being a fine gentleman—even if she is an illiterate
whore. It soothed my vanity. You've never been very soothing, my
dear."

"Oh, Rhett..." she began, miserable at the very mention of
Belle's name, but he waved her to silence and went on.

"And then, that night when I carried you upstairs—I thought—I
hoped—I hoped so much I was afraid to face you the next morning, for
fear I'd been mistaken and you didn't love me. I was so afraid you'd
laugh at me I went off and got drunk. And when I came back, I was
shaking in my boots and if you had come even halfway to meet me, had
given me some sign, I think I'd have kissed your feet. But you
didn't."

"Oh, but Rhett, I did want you then but you were so nasty! I did
want you! I think—yes, that must have been when I first knew I cared
about you. Ashley—I never was happy about Ashley after that, but you
were so nasty that I—"

"Oh, well," he said. "It seems we've been at cross purposes, doesn't
it? But it doesn't matter now. I'm only telling you, so you won't ever
wonder about it all. When you were sick and it was all my fault, I
stood outside your door, hoping you'd call for me, but you didn't, and
then

=== SCENE 126 ===
een sorry for anyone without feeling
contemptuous as well, because it was the first time she had ever
approached understanding any other human being. And she could
understand his shrewd caginess, so like her own, his obstinate pride
that kept him from admitting his love for fear of a rebuff.

"Ah, darling," she said coming forward, hoping he would put out his
arms and draw her to his knees. "Darling, I'm so sorry but I'll make it
all up to you! We can be so happy, now that we know the truth
and—Rhett—look at me, Rhett! There—there can be other babies—not
like Bonnie but—"

"Thank you, no," said Rhett, as if he were refusing a piece of
bread. "I'll not risk my heart a third time."

"Rhett, don't say such things! Oh, what can I say to make you
understand? I've told you how sorry I am—"

"My darling, you're such a child. You think that by saying, 'I'm
sorry,' all the errors and hurts of years past can be remedied,
obliterated from the mind, all the poison drawn from old wounds....
Take my handkerchief, Scarlett. Never, at any crisis of your life, have
I known you to have a handkerchief."

She took the handkerchief, blew her nose and sat down. It was
obvious that he was not going to take her in his arms. It was beginning
to be obvious that all his talk about loving her meant nothing. It was
a tale of a time long past, and he was looking at it as though it had
never happened to him. And that was frightening. He looked at her in an
almost kindly way, speculation in his eyes.

"How old are you, my dear? You never would tell me."

"Twenty-eight," she answered dully, muffled in the handkerchief.

"That's not a vast age. It's a young age to have gained the whole
world and lost your own soul, isn't it? Don't look frightened. I'm not
referring to hell fire to come for your affair with Ashley. I'm merely
speaking metaphorically. Ever since I've known you, you've wanted two
things. Ashley and to be rich enough to tell the world to go to hell.
Well, you are rich enough and you've spoken sharply to the world and
you've got Ashley, if you want him. But all that doesn't seem to be
enough now."

She was frightened but not at the thought of hell fire. She was
thinking: "But Rhett is my soul and I'm losing him. And if I lose him,
nothing else matters! No, not friends or money or—or anything. If only
I had him I wouldn't even mind being poor again. No, I wouldn't mind
being cold again or even hungry. But he can't mean— Oh, he can't!"

She wiped her eyes and said desperately:

"Rhett, if you once loved me so much, there must be something left
for me."

"Out of it all I find only two things that remain and they are the
two things you hate the most—pity and an odd feeling of kindness."

Pity! Kindness! "Oh, my God," she thought despairingly. Anything but
pity and kindness. Whenever she felt these two emotions for anyone,
they went hand in hand with contempt. Was he contemptuous of her too?
Anything would be preferable to that. Even the cynical coolness of the
war days, the drunken madness that drove him the night he carried her
up the stairs, his hard fingers bruising her body, or the barbed
drawling words that she now realized had covered a bitter love.
Anything except this impersonal kindness that was written so plainly in
his face.

"Then—then you mean I've ruined it all—that you don't love me any
more?"

"That's right."

"But," she said stubbornly, like a child who still feels that to
state a desire is to gain that desire, "but I love you!"

"That's your misfortune."

She looked up quickly to see if there was a jeer behind those words
but there was none. He was simply stating a fact. But it was a fact she
still would not believe—could not believe. She looked at him with
slanting eyes that burned with a desperate obstinacy and the sudden
hard line of jaw that sprang out through her soft cheek was Gerald's
jaw.

"Don't be a fool, Rhett! I can make—"

He flung up a hand in mock horror and his black brows went up in the
old sardonic crescents.

"Don't look so determined, Scarlett! You frighten me. I see you are
contemplating the transfer of your tempestuous affections from Ashley
to me and I fear for my liberty and my peace of mind. No, Scarlett, I
will not be pursued as the luckless Ashley was pursued. Besides, I am
going away."

Her jaw trembled before she clenched her teeth to steady it. Go
away? No, anything but that! How could life go on without him? Everyone
had gone from her, everyone who mattered except Rhett. He couldn't go.
But how could she stop him? She was powerless against his cool mind,
his disinterested words.

"I am going away. I intended to tell you when you came home from
Marietta."

"You are deserting me?"

"Don't be the neglected, dramatic wife, Scarlett. The role isn't
becoming. I take it, then, you do not want a divorce or even a
separation? Well, then, I'll come back often enough to keep gossip
down."

"Damn gossip!" she said fiercely. "It's you I want. Take me with
you!"

"No," he said, and there was finality in his voice. For a moment she
was on the verge of an outburst of childish wild tears. She could have
thrown herself on the floor, cursed and screamed and drummed her heels.
But some remnant of pride, of common sense stiffened her. She thought,
if I did, he'd only laugh, or just look at me. I mustn't bawl; I
mustn't beg. I mustn't do anything to risk his contempt. He must
respect me even—even if he doesn't love me.

She lifted her chin and managed to ask quietly:

"Where will you go?"

There was a faint gleam of admiration in his eyes as he
answered.

"Perhaps to England—or to Paris. Perhaps to Charleston to try to
make peace with my people."

"But you hate them! I've heard you laugh at them so often and—"

He shrugged.

"I still laugh—but I've reached the end of roaming, Scarlett. I'm
forty-five—the age when a man begins to value some of the things he's
thrown away so lightly in youth, the clannishness of families, honor
and security, roots that go deep— Oh, no! I'm not recanting, I'm not
regretting anything I've ever done. I've had a hell of a good
time—such a hell of a good time that it's begun to pall and now I want
something different. No, I never intend to change more than my spots.
But I want the outer semblance of the things I used to know, the utter
boredom of respectability—other people's respectability, my pet, not
my own—the calm dignity life can have when it's lived by gentle folks,
the genial grace of days that are gone. When I lived those days I
didn't realize the slow charm of them—"

Again Scarlett was back in the windy orchard of Tara and there was
the same look in Rhett's eyes that had been in Ashley's eyes that day.
Ashley's words were as clear in her ears as though he and not Rhett
were speaking. Fragments of words came back to her and she quoted
parrot-like: "A glamor to it—a perfection, a symmetry like Grecian
art."

Rhett said sharply: "Why did you say that? That's what I meant."

"It was something that—that Ashley said once, about the old
days."

He shrugged and the light went out of his eyes.

"Always Ashley," he said and was silent for a moment.

"Scarlett, when you are forty-five, perhaps you will know what I'm
talking about and then perhaps you, too, will be tired of imitation
gentry and shoddy manners and cheap emotions. But I doubt it. I think
you'll always be more attracted by glister than by gold. Anyway, I
can't wait that long to see. And I have no desire to wait. It just
doesn't interest me. I'm going to hunt in old towns and old countries
where some of the old times must still linger. I'm that sentimental.
Atlanta's too raw for me, too new."

"Stop," she said suddenly. She had hardly heard anything he had
said. Certainly her mind had not taken it in. But she knew she could no
longer endure with any fortitude the sound of his voice when there was
no love in it.

He paused and looked at her quizzically.

"Well, you get my meaning, don't you?" he questioned, rising to his
feet.

She threw out her hands to him, palms up, in the age-old gesture of
appeal and her heart, again, was in her face.

"No," she cried. "All I know is that you do not love me and you are
going away! Oh, my darling, if you go, what shall I do?"

For a moment he hesitated as if debating whether a kind lie were
kinder in the long run than the truth. Then he shrugged.

"Scarlett, I was never one to patiently pick up broken fragments and
glue them together and tell myself that the mended whole was as good as
new. What is broken is broken—and I'd rather remember it as it was at
its best than mend it and see the broken places as long as I lived.
Perhaps, if I were younger—" he sighed. "But I'm too old to believe in
such sentimentalities as clean slates and starting all over. I'm too
old to shoulder the burden of constant lies that go with living in
polite disillusionment. I couldn't live with you and lie to you and I
certainly couldn't lie to myself. I can't even lie to you now. I wish I
could care what you do or where you go, but I can't."

He drew a short breath and said lightly but softly:

"My dear, I don't give a damn."

* * * * *

She silently watched him go up the stairs, feeling that she would
strangle at the pain in her throat. With the sound of his feet dying
away in the upper hall was dying the last thing in the world that
mattered. She knew now that there was no appeal of emotion or reason
which would turn that cool brain from its verdict. She knew now that he
had meant every word he said, lightly though some of them had been
spoken. She knew because she sensed in him something strong,
unyielding, implacable—all the qualities she had looked for in Ashley
and never found.

She had never understood either of the men she had loved and so she
had lost them both. Now, she had a fumbling knowledge that, had she
ever understood Ashley, she would never have loved him; had she ever
understood Rhett, she would never have lost him. She wondered forlornly
if she had ever really understood anyone in the world.

There was a merciful dullness in her mind now, a dullness that she
knew from long experience would soon give way to sharp pain, even as
severed tissues, shocked by the surgeon's knife, have a brief instant
of insensibility before their agony begins.

"I won't think of it now," she thought grimly, summoning up her old
charm. "I'll go crazy if I think about losing him now. I'll thin

